

of all, yet the general idea which we ought to form of it has not yet
 Its definition and its principal divisions have
 Indeed the plural name--"The
indicate the want of unity in the common conception of it.

different fundamental conceptions which constitute this great science
the whole to manifest itself with clearness.
attention of geometers has been too exclusively absorbed by the special
have made of them to the most important laws of the universe, to allow

But at the present time the progress of the special departments is no
 The science
its most essential application, to have arrived at that state of
in a single system, in order to prepare for new advances.
observe that the last important improvements of the science have
impressing on its principal parts a character of unity which did not

To form a just idea of the object of mathematical science, we may start
calling it "_The science of magnitudes_," or, which is more definite,
_"
deficient in precision and depth, though, at bottom, just) to a
difficulty of the science.

THE OBJECT OF MATHEMATICS.

_ The question of _measuring_ a magnitude in
comparison of this magnitude with another similar magnitude, supposed to
of the same kind.
mathematics--vast and profound as it is with reason reputed to
labours, which offer inexhaustible occupation to our intellectual
processes for obtaining directly the ratios of the quantities to be
operations of similar character to the superposition of lines, as

The error of this definition consists in presenting as direct an object
 The _direct_
most frequently an operation quite impossible for us to perform; so that
comparisons, we should be obliged to renounce the knowledge of most of

_Difficulties.
if we limit ourselves to consider specially the particular case which
straight line by another.
simple which we can conceive, can nevertheless scarcely ever be effected
 In reflecting on the whole of the conditions necessary to
frequently they cannot be all fulfilled at the same time.
the most palpable of these conditions--that of being able to pass over
measurement to its whole length--evidently excludes at once by far the
place, all the distances between the celestial bodies, or from any one
terrestrial distances, which are so frequently inaccessible.
this first condition be found to be fulfilled, it is still farther
would render a direct measurement equally impossible.
be suitably situated; for let it be one which we could measure with the
up vertically, and it becomes impossible to measure it.

lines, exist in a very much greater degree in the measurement of
 It is this fact which
to see; for the human mind has been compelled to renounce, in almost all
them _indirectly_, and it is thus that it has been led to the creation

_General Method.
evidently the only one conceivable, to ascertain magnitudes which do not
which are susceptible of being determined immediately, and by means of
subsist between the two.
science viewed as a whole.
of it, we must consider that this indirect determination of magnitudes
 In a great number of cases,
the principal magnitudes sought are to be determined, cannot themselves
subject of a similar question, and so on; so that on many occasions the
between the system of unknown magnitudes which are the final objects of
measurement, by whose means we finally determine the first, with which

_Illustrations.
too abstract in the preceding generalities.

 _Falling Bodies.
phenomenon, very simple, indeed, but which may nevertheless give rise to
applications--the phenomenon of the vertical fall of heavy bodies.

phenomenon, perceives at once that the two _quantities_ which it
_time_ of its fall--are necessarily connected with each other, since
of geometers, that they are "_functions_" of each other.
considered under this point of view, gives rise then to a mathematical
one of these two magnitudes, when it is impossible, the measurement of
 It is thus, for example, that we may determine indirectly the
would occupy in falling to its bottom, and by suitable procedures this
horizontal line placed in the most favourable circumstances for easy and
 On other occasions it is the height from which a body
fall could not be observed directly; then the same phenomenon would give
height; as, for example, if we wished to ascertain what would be the
earth.

we do not pay attention to the variation in the intensity of gravity, or

phenomenon in its greatest generality, in supposing the fall oblique,
 Then,
other by a relation easy to follow, the phenomenon will present a much
horizontal direction; the time employed in traversing it; the velocity
direction of its primitive impulse, which may also be viewed as
account), the resistance of the medium and the intensity of gravity.
these different quantities will be connected with one another, in such a
others; and this will present as many distinct mathematical questions as
consideration.
problem may cause (as in the above example) a mathematical research, at
difficult questions, whose complete and rigorous solution surpasses as

2.
_ Let us take a second example from
 Let it be proposed to determine a distance which
as making part of a _figure_, or certain system of lines, chosen in such
case which is most simple, and to which all the others may be finally
triangle, in which we can determine directly either another side and two
 Thence-forward, the knowledge of the
of a mathematical calculation, which will consist in deducing it from
them.
complicated, if the parts which we have supposed to be known cannot
indirect manner, by the aid of new auxiliary systems, the number of
considerable.
will frequently be sufficient for obtaining new quantities, which will
 Thus, when we know at
apparent diameter will evidently permit us to determine indirectly its
analogous investigations, its surface, its volume, even its weight, and
us.

 _Astronomical Facts.
able to ascertain, not only the distances from the planets to the earth,
true figure, even to the inequalities of their surface; and, what seemed
mean densities, the principal circumstances of the fall of heavy bodies

By the power of mathematical theories, all these different results, and
have required no other direct measurements than those of a very small
angles.
the general range of the science, that if we did not fear to multiply
reserve them for the determination of the quantities which could not be
of precise estimation, which the various orders of phenomena can offer
straight line and of a suitable number of angles.

TRUE DEFINITION OF MATHEMATICS.

assigning to it as its object the _indirect_ measurement of magnitudes,
from others by means of the precise relations existing between them_.

the ordinary definitions, characterizes immediately a true _science_,
operations, which may evidently become very complicated, because of the
between the unknown quantities and those which admit of a direct
question; and of the nature of the relations between all these different
 According to
regarding all the quantities which any phenomenon can present, as
them from one another.
give rise to considerations of this kind; whence results the naturally
mathematical science.
exactly as possible its real extension.

employed to designate the science which we are considering.
denomination, which has taken to-day so definite a meaning by itself
 Such a designation, rigorously
by the moderns only to indicate the mathematics as _the_ science, beyond

Indeed, every true science has for its object the determination of
which exist between them.
of facts; if the different observations were entirely isolated, there
 We may even say, in general terms, that _science_
permit it, with all direct observation, by enabling us to deduce from
number of results.
in action, of the _laws_ which we succeed in discovering among natural
the highest possible degree the same kind of researches which are
respective sphere.

ITS TWO FUNDAMENTAL DIVISIONS.

paying any regard to its divisions.
this general view, and to form a just idea of the philosophical
 The

This principal division, which we are about to investigate, can be
far as it spontaneously presents itself to us, in making the exact
 We will, therefore, having
characterize with precision the principal different orders of inquiries,

_Their different Objects.
question divides itself necessarily into two parts, of natures
 We have
unknown magnitudes, according to the relations between them and known
 Now for this object, it is evidently necessary, in the first
quantities which we are considering.
constitutes that which I call the _concrete_ part of the solution.
it is finished, the question changes; it is now reduced to a pure
when we know what precise relations connect them with known numbers.
This second branch of inquiries is what I call the _abstract_ part of
 Hence follows the fundamental division of general
and CONCRETE MATHEMATICS.

however simple or complicated it may be.
to make it intelligible.

considering the simplest case, we see that in order to succeed in
fallen, and the duration of its fall, we must commence by discovering
geometers, the _equation_ which exists between them.
research is completed, every attempt to determine numerically the value
premature, for it would have no basis.
that they depend on one another--which every one at once perceives--but
 This
constitutes incomparably the greater part of the problem.
scientific spirit is so modern, that no one, perhaps, before Galileo,
its fall: a circumstance which excludes the hypothesis, towards which
the most simple _functions_, without any other motive than its greater
proportional to the time.
the discovery of the law of Galileo.

another nature.
each successive second of its fall increase as the series of odd
deduce the height from the time, or the time from the height; and this
the law which has been established, is a known multiple of the second
of the one when that of the other is given.

abstract one.
phenomenon in its greatest generality, as I have done above for another
 According to the circumstances, sometimes the first, sometimes
of the whole question; for the mathematical law of the phenomenon may be
discover, but very complicated; so that the two great sections of
as exactly equivalent in extent and in difficulty, as well as in
separately.

_ These two parts, essentially distinct in
_nature_ of the inquiries of which they are composed.

character of the phenomena considered, and must necessarily vary when we
nature of the objects examined, and is concerned with only the
called _abstract_.
different phenomena, which, in spite of their extreme diversity, will
susceptible, when studied by itself, of being resolved once for all.
Thus, for instance, the same law which exists between the space and the
other phenomena which offer no analogy with the first nor with each
body and the length of its diameter; it determines, in like manner, the
distance of the objects lighted or heated, &c.
to these different mathematical questions, having been treated in
the concrete part will have necessarily to be again taken up for each
to give any direct aid, in that connexion, for the solution of the rest.

concrete part, special.

concrete mathematics has a philosophical character, which is essentially
is purely logical, rational.
question is necessarily founded on the consideration of the external
combinations.
completely separated, can consist only of a series of logical
equations of a phenomenon, the determination of the quantities therein
whatever the difficulties may be.
to deduce from these equations results which are evidently contained in
occasion to consult anew the external world; the consideration of which,
carefully set aside in order to reduce the labour to its true peculiar
 The _abstract_ part of mathematics is then purely
logic to a certain class of deductions.
mechanics, which, as we shall see presently, constitute the _concrete_
like all the rest, although the extreme simplicity of their phenomena
sometimes caused a misconception of the experimental character of their

We see, by this brief general comparison, how natural and profound is

We have now to circumscribe, as exactly as we can in this first sketch,



_Concrete Mathematics_ having for its object the discovery of the
composed of as many distinct sciences as we find really distinct
 But we are yet very far from having
see, presently, that the greater part will very probably always hide
 In reality, in the present condition
phenomena, whose equations we constantly know; these are, firstly,
 Thus, then, the
MECHANICS.

logical universality, when we consider all phenomena from the most
 In fact, if all the parts
only geometrical phenomena to observe, since all would be reduced to
motions which take place in it, we would have also to consider
 Hence the universe, in the statical point of view,
mechanical phenomena.
fundamental natural sciences, in this sense, that all natural effects
extension or of the laws of motion.

difficulty is to specialize it with the necessary precision, and to
study of nature; that is, to effectually reduce each principal question
the question of geometry or mechanics, to which we might rationally
 This transformation, which requires great
phenomena, has thus far been really executed only for those of
properly so called.
,
orders of observations.
nature rigorously circumscribed, to confound them with the science would
the usual division, so faulty in so many other respects, of the
"
  [Footnote 1: The investigation of the mathematical phenomena of the
  entirely direct manner, of Thermological equations.
  discovery tends to elevate our philosophical hopes as to the future
  and renders it proper, in the opinion of author, to regard
]


The nature of abstract mathematics (the general division of which will

its greatest extent, which reaches from the most simple numerical

for its peculiar object.
necessarily, the knowledge of the precise relations, _i.
_, of the
considered; that which is, on the contrary, the _stopping point_ of
 However complicated, or however indirect these
from them the values of the unknown quantities by means of those which
 This _science_, although nearer perfection than any other, is
a manner completely satisfactory.

  very convenient word (for which our language has no precise
  of its being often popularly confounded with its Differential and
]
Mathematical analysis is, then, the true rational basis of the entire
 It constitutes the first and the most
 The ideas with which it
simple which it is possible for us to conceive.

explain why, when it is properly employed, it is such a powerful
is self-evident, but especially to establish an infinitely more perfect
application; for, our conceptions having been so generalized and
contains the _implicit_ solution of a great number of diverse physical
greater facility in perceiving relations between phenomena which at
 We thus naturally see
unexpected approximations between problems which at first offered no

resemblance between the determination of the direction of a curve at
instant of its variable motion? and yet these questions, however

The high relative perfection of mathematical analysis is as easily
 This perfection is not due, as some have thought, to the
eminently concise and general as they are.
analytical ideas have been formed without the algebraic signs having
had conceived them.
calculus is due principally to the extreme simplicity of the ideas which
not the least hope, by any artifice of scientific language, of
subjects, and which are necessarily condemned by their nature to a



Our examination of the philosophical character of mathematical science
composition, we did not examine the real extent of its domain.

 For this purpose it is indispensable to perceive,
by itself necessarily and rigorously universal; for there is no question
certain quantities from others by means of certain relations, and
question of numbers.
our object is to arrive at numbers, at quantities, though often in a
 Thus, taking an
the phenomena of living bodies, even when considered (to take the most
the questions of therapeutics may be viewed as consisting in determining
which must act upon it to bring it to its normal state, admitting, for
zero, or negative, or even contradictory?
The fundamental idea of Descartes on the relation of the concrete to the
distinction of metaphysics, that all ideas of quality may be reduced to
 This conception, established at first by its immortal
effectually extended to mechanical phenomena, and in our days to those
 As a result of this gradual generalization, there are now no
capable of being applied to all our real ideas of every sort, so that
_equation_; as much so, indeed, as is a curve or a motion, excepting the
and oftentimes are, superior to the greatest powers of the human mind.

 Important as it is to comprehend the rigorous
no less indispensable to consider now the great real _limitations_,
degree its actual domain, in proportion as phenomena, in becoming

Every question may be conceived as capable of being reduced to a pure
transformation increases so much with the complication of the phenomena

This will be easily seen, if we consider that to bring a question within
precise relations which exist between the quantities which are found in
being the necessary starting point of all analytical labours.
evidently be so much the more difficult as we have to do with phenomena
 We shall thus
justly hope ever to obtain that high degree of scientific perfection.

admit of mathematical laws, susceptible of being discovered, evidently
fixed numbers.
physics_, and probably also the most complicated parts of inorganic
mathematical analysis, by reason of the extreme numerical variability of
 Every precise idea of fixed numbers is
employ it otherwise than as a means of relieving the attention, and when

We ought not, however, on this account, to cease to conceive all
are condemned to be ignorant of, only because of the too great
 The most complex phenomena of living
simplest phenomena of unorganized matter.
rigorously each of the simple causes which concur in producing a single
show itself endowed, in determinate circumstances, with a kind of
universal gravitation, a veritable type of the fundamental laws of

There is a _second_ reason why we cannot bring complicated phenomena
 Even if we could ascertain
combination of so great a number of conditions would render the
the question would remain in most cases incapable of solution.

mathematical questions become, even those relating to the most simple
near together the abstract and the concrete state, having regard to all
effect produced.
of the flow of a fluid through a given orifice, by virtue of its gravity
into the account all the essential circumstances.
with the still more simple motion of a solid projectile in a resisting

Why has mathematical analysis been able to adapt itself with such
Because they are, in spite of popular appearances, much more simple than
 The most complicated problem which they present, that of the
other by virtue of their gravitation, by the influence of a third body
most simple terrestrial problem.
difficulties so great that we yet possess only approximate solutions of
 It is even easy to see that the high perfection to which solar
mathematical science is, besides, essentially due to our having
facilities presented by the peculiarly favourable constitution of our
 The planets which compose it are quite few in number,
the sun; they are, besides, very distant from one another; they have
slightly inclined to each other, and so on.
circumstances that the perturbations are generally inconsiderable, and
account, in connexion with the action of the sun on each particular
its proximity, of causing perceptible derangements.

been composed of a greater number of planets concentrated into a less
different inclinations, and considerable eccentricities; if these bodies
it is certain that, supposing the same law of gravitation to exist, we
phenomena to our mathematical analysis, and probably we should not even

These hypothetical conditions would find themselves exactly realized in
them by the theory of general gravitation.

convinced, I think, that in reducing the future extension of the great
the field comprised in the different departments of inorganic physics, I

of mathematical science, it was equally so to indicate the conditions
the human mind astray from the true scientific direction in the study of
impossible perfection.


of mathematical science, as well as its general relations with the whole
examination of the great sciences of which it is composed.

_--ANALYSIS and GEOMETRY are the two great heads under which
 To these _M.
     Rational MECHANICS; but as it is not comprised in the usual idea of
     and interest, it is not included in the present translation.


BOOK I.





ANALYSIS.


CHAPTER I.



Descartes, the advances of its abstract portion have always been
necessary, in order to conceive the science in a manner truly logical,
to the philosophical study of Geometry and Mechanics.
theories, more simple and more general than those of concrete
while these, on the contrary, have, by their nature, a continual need of
progress.
present some very perceptible traces of their geometrical or mechanical
character, which no longer manifests itself except in some secondary
Lagrange) to present them in a dogmatic exposition, by a purely abstract
 It is this which will be
investigations to the most general considerations upon each principal

The definite object of our researches in concrete mathematics being the
phenomenon under consideration, and these equations constituting the
from them the determination of certain quantities by means of others, I
than has been customary into that fundamental idea of _equation_, the
labours.
true field of analysis, there will result from it the important
demarcation between the concrete and the abstract part of mathematics,
established in the introductory chapter.


THE TRUE IDEA OF AN EQUATION.

We usually form much too vague an idea of what an _equation_ is, when we
functions of the magnitudes which we are considering.
equation is evidently a relation of equality, it is far from being true
_equation_, of the kind of those to which, by their nature, the methods

This want of precision in the logical consideration of an idea which is
of rendering it almost impossible to explain, in general terms, the
relation between the concrete and the abstract, and which stands out so
 If the
suppose it to be in our definition of it, it is not apparent what great
equations of any problem whatsoever; for the whole would thus appear to
any great intellectual efforts, seeing that we can hardly conceive of
equality, or which cannot be readily brought thereto by some very easy

Thus, when we admit every species of _functions_ into the definition of
we almost always experience in putting a problem into an equation, and
elaboration of the equation when once obtained.
abstract and general idea of an _equation_ does not at all correspond to
development of the science.
correlation, which it is very important to rectify.

_Division of Functions into Abstract and Concrete.
so, I begin by distinguishing two sorts of _functions_, _abstract_ or
 The first alone can
 We may, therefore, henceforth define
relation of equality between two _abstract_ functions of the magnitudes
 In order not to have to return again to this
without which the idea would not be sufficiently general, that these
problem presents of itself, but also to all the other auxiliary
to introduce, simply as a mathematical artifice, with the sole object of
 I here
importance, which will be found at the end of this chapter.
return to the essential distinction of functions as abstract and

This distinction may be established in two ways, essentially different,
to say, by characterizing in a general manner the peculiar nature of
all the abstract functions at present known, at least so far as relates

_À priori_, the functions which I call _abstract_ are those which
conceived between numbers alone, without there being need of indicating
 I name, on the other
expressed cannot be defined or conceived except by assigning a
, in which it

Most functions in their origin, even those which are at present the most
make the preceding distinction understood, by citing only the successive
become formed, geometers have considered the most simple analytical
 I will indicate powers, for example, which have in general

conceived as simply _abstract_, were, for the geometers of antiquity,
superficies of a square, or the volume of a cube to the length of their
 These had in their eyes such a character so exclusively, that it
the elementary algebraic properties of these functions, relating to the
that epoch only real theorems of geometry, to which a numerical meaning

I shall have occasion to cite presently, for another reason, a new
which I have just exhibited; it is that of circular functions, both
concrete, sometimes abstract, according to the point of view under

_À posteriori_, the general character which renders a function abstract
certain determinate function is veritably abstract, and therefore
question of fact, inasmuch as we are going to enumerate all the


_ At first view this enumeration
number.
difficulty disappears; for, though the number of the different functions
contrary, even at the present day, composed of a very small number of
evidently sufficient for deciding the abstract or concrete character of
according as it shall be composed exclusively of these simple abstract

We evidently have to consider, for this purpose, only the functions of a
are constantly, by their nature, more or less _compound_.

depends upon it.
which we can now conceive between _y_ and _x_, are expressed by the ten
its _inverse_, that is, with that which would be obtained from the
_x_.

                   ITS NAME.

_
_
2d couple  {1° _y_ = _ax_                  _Product.
           {2° _y_ = _a/x_                 _Quotient.

_
_
4th couple {1° _y_ = _a^x_                 _Exponential.
           {2° _y_ = _[log a]x_            _Logarithmic.

 _x_              _Direct Circular.
           {2° _y_ = arc(sin.
      _Inverse Circular.

  resources and the extent (now so insufficient) of mathematical
  analytical elements.
  legitimate, it is important to remark that circular functions are
  functions.
  functions of the four first couples are at the same time simple and
  character in succession, according to the point of view under which
  never present these two properties simultaneously.

  number of analytical elements, certain conditions being fulfilled.
  It is thus, for example, that the labours of M.

  analysis; and the same is true of some definite integrals obtained
 Fourier in the theory of heat.

the abstract functions known at the present day.
are evidently sufficient to give rise to an infinite number of

No rational consideration rigorously circumscribes, _à priori_, the
state of the science.
more numerous than they were for Descartes, and even for Newton and
introduced into analysis by the labours of John Bernouilli and Euler.
Doubtless new ones will be hereafter admitted; but, as I shall show
greatly multiplied, their real augmentation giving rise to very great

We can now form a definite, and, at the same time, sufficiently extended
 This
must be really to establish the _equations_ of phenomena, since we have
conceive the mathematical laws of these phenomena by the aid of
have just enumerated.
the problem becomes truly abstract, and is reduced to a pure question of
conceive between numbers, considered by themselves.
the solution, whatever the appearances may be, the question is still
_calculus_.
_concrete_ to the _abstract_ in general consists especially in the
possess, and by means of which, nevertheless, in spite of the little
the precise relations which all the different natural phenomena can
 Considering the infinite diversity which must
understand how far below the true difficulty our conceptions must
analysis have been in the first place furnished to us by the
priori_, no rational guarantee of their necessary suitableness to
 I will
which the human mind has succeeded in diminishing, in a remarkable
of the concrete to the abstract in mathematics, without, however, its
elements.


THE TWO PRINCIPAL DIVISIONS OF THE CALCULUS.

The preceding explanations determine with precision the true object and
 I must now pass to the
the calculus as a whole.

science of the _calculus_ consists in dividing it, in the first place,
denominations, I will give the names of _Algebraic calculus_, or
the caution to take these two expressions in their most extended logical
usually attached to them.

elementary up to the most transcendental, is necessarily composed of two
 In the first,
apparent the manner in which the unknown quantities are formed by the
 In
obtained; that is, to determine directly the values of the numbers
given numbers: this is the _arithmetical_ question.
that, in every solution which is truly rational, it necessarily follows
complement, since it is evidently necessary to know the mode of
values for each particular case.
algebraic part of the solution becomes the starting point of the

  [Footnote 4: Suppose, for example, that a question gives the
  magnitudes, _a_ and _b_,
  _x³_ + 3_ax_ = 2_b_,
  as is the case in the problem of the trisection of an angle.
  at once that the dependence between _x_ on the one side, and _ab_ on
  preserves its primitive form, we do not at all perceive in what
 This must be

 When, by a
  derivation more and more apparent, we have arrived at presenting the


  the arithmetical operations indicated by that formula, we would
  important.
  formula for its starting point, and finding the number _x_ when the
]
We thus see that the _algebraic_ calculus and the _arithmetical_
 They differ no less in the
in the first as to their _relations_, and in the second as to their
 The true spirit of the calculus, in general, requires this
line of demarcation between the two periods of the solution to be
 The
be of much assistance, in each particular question, in directing the
corresponding difficulty.
the calculus obliges us very often (as will be explained in the next
solution of the same question.
separate clearly the two parts of the labour, yet the preceding

In endeavouring to sum up as succinctly as possible the distinction just
for its object the _resolution of equations_; taking this expression in
_implicit_ functions into equivalent _explicit_ ones.
ARITHMETIC may be defined as destined to _the determination of the
 Henceforth, therefore, we will briefly say that
Values_.

definitions.
Signs has led to the distinguishing the two fundamental branches of the
subjects of discussion, an idea which is evidently absurd in principle
 Even the celebrated definition given by Newton,
very false idea of the nature of algebra and of that of arithmetic.

  definition, because it serves as the basis of the opinion which
  form of its abstract part, without considering that at the time of
  developed to enable the general character of each of its principal
  at that time propose a definition which at the present day he would
]
Having thus established the fundamental division of the calculus into
extent, the importance, and the difficulty of these two sorts of
Functions_, which is to be the principal subject of our study.


THE CALCULUS OF VALUES, OR ARITHMETIC.

_Its Extent.
first view, to present a field as vast as that of _algebra_, since it
different algebraic formulas whose values are to be determined.
very simple reflection will show the difference.
_simple_ and _compound_, it is evident that when we know how to
functions will no longer present any difficulty.
of view, a compound function plays a very different part from that of
proceed all the principal difficulties of analysis.
different with the Arithmetical Calculus.
distinct arithmetical operations is only that determined by the number
been given above.
necessarily gives that of all the functions, infinite in number, which
it exists at present.
without the creation of really new analytical elements, the number of
 The field of _arithmetic_ is,
rigorously indefinite.

values_ is, in reality, much more extensive than it is commonly
consist of determinations of values, are not ordinarily classed as such,
of a body of analytical researches more or less elevated, the too high
principal cause of this confusion of ideas.
construction of a table of logarithms, but also the calculation of
kind.
distinct and more elevated order, all the methods by which we determine
attributed to the quantities on which it depends, when we cannot express
 In this point of
algebraically, and even the calculation of "Definite Integrals," whose
appearances, of the domain of _arithmetic_, in which we must necessarily
values of functions_.
fact, constantly homogeneous, whatever the _determinations_ in question,

To complete a just idea of the real extent of the calculus of values, we
calculus which now bears the name of the _Theory of Numbers_, and which
 This branch, very extensive by its nature,
great, has for its object the discovery of the properties inherent in
particular system of numeration.
_transcendental arithmetic_; and to it would really apply the definition

The entire domain of arithmetic is, then, much more extended than is
more than a point, so to speak, in comparison with the _calculus of
 This
considerations which I have now to indicate respecting the true nature
examined.

_Its true Nature.
_determinations of values_ properly consist, we easily recognize that
to be valued; transformations which, in spite of their special end, are
analysis.
simply conceived as an appendix, and a particular application of the
say, as a distinct section in the whole body of abstract mathematics.

that, when we propose to determine the _value_ of an unknown number
arithmetical question, already defined and expressed under a certain
under another determinate form, to which we are accustomed to refer the
regular system of _numeration_.
completely of a simple _transformation_, that when the primitive
system of numeration, there is no longer any determination of value,
itself.
we answer it by merely repeating the enunciation of the question,[6] and

had no need of being transformed, while it would not be thus in adding
expressed in a manner conformed to the rank which it occupies in the


  numeration than in the French, since "twenty-one" is our more usual
]
To sum up as comprehensively as possible the preceding views, we may
putting its primitive expression under the form
  _a_ + _bz_ + _cz²_ + _dz³_ + _ez⁴_ .
 .
 .

_d_, &c.
than _z_; capable of becoming equal to zero; but never negative.
arithmetical question may thus be stated as consisting in putting under
which are supposed to have themselves a similar form already.
then see in the different operations of arithmetic only simple
special difficulties belonging to conditions relating to the nature of

It clearly follows that abstract mathematics is essentially composed of
important, most extended, and most difficult part.
the exclusive subject of our analytical investigations.
no longer delay on the _Calculus of Values_, but pass immediately to the





_ We have determined, at the
which we experience in putting mathematical questions into _equations_.
It is essentially because of the insufficiency of the very small number
concrete to the abstract is usually so difficult to establish.
endeavour now to appreciate in a philosophical manner the general
important cases, in overcoming this fundamental obstacle to _The


 _By the Creation of new Functions.
question from the most general point of view, we are led at once to the
equations of phenomena.
comes from the too small number of our analytical elements, the whole
 But this means,
certainly insufficient.

veritably new, presents in itself the greatest difficulties.
even something contradictory in such an idea; for a new analytical
conditions, if we could not immediately _determine its value_.
the other hand, how are we to _determine the value_ of a new function
of those already known? That appears almost impossible.
into analysis of another elementary abstract function, or rather of
_inverse_), supposes then, of necessity, the simultaneous creation of a

If we endeavour to obtain an idea of the means which the human mind
procedures by the aid of which it has actually conceived those which we
uncertainty, for the artifices which it has already made use of for that
 To convince ourselves of it, let us
into analysis, and at the formation of which we have been present, so
couple does not strictly give veritable new analytical elements.
function _a^x_, and, consequently, its inverse, have been formed by
time known, namely, powers--when the idea of them had become
 The consideration of a power relatively to the
sufficient to give rise to a truly novel simple function, the variation
 But this artifice, as simple
manner all our present analytical elements, we end in only making them

We have, then, no idea as to how we could proceed to the creation of new
necessary conditions.
present attained the effectual limit established in that respect by the
 It is even certain that the last special
resources in that respect, by introducing within the domain of the
place of new simple functions, although they are far from fulfilling all
the table of true analytical elements.
unquestionable that the number of these elements cannot increase except
 It is therefore not from these sources that the
as is possible, the establishment of equations.

2.
Quantities.
but one other: it is, seeing the impossibility of finding directly the
corresponding ones between other auxiliary quantities, connected with
between which we may return to that between the primitive magnitudes.
Such is, in substance, the eminently fruitful conception, which the
admirable instrument for the mathematical explanation of natural

As a general philosophical principle, the auxiliary quantities, which
with them, in order to facilitate the establishment of equations, might
the question.
has been commonly attributed to it by even the most profound geometers.
It is extremely important for us to view it in its whole logical extent,
different from that to which we have thus far confined ourselves
that we shall one day succeed in essentially perfecting mathematical
means of investigating the laws of nature than our present processes,

But, regarding merely the present constitution of the science, the only
quantities in the _Transcendental Analysis_ are what are called, 1⁰,
of those quantities, if we regard this analysis in the manner of
simultaneous increments of the primitive quantities compared with one
increments, if we adopt the conception of NEWTON; or, 3⁰, the
coefficients of the different terms of their respective increments,

These three principal methods of viewing our present transcendental
have been successively proposed, are, by their nature, necessarily
explained in a general manner in the third chapter.
value, we shall there see that the conception of Leibnitz has thus far,
character is exceedingly vicious; while that the conception of Lagrange,
philosophical unity which it has established in mathematical analysis
presents, as yet, serious inconveniences in the applications, by
 The conception of Newton occupies
more rational than that of Leibnitz; less philosophical, but more

This is not the place to explain the advantages of the introduction of
magnitudes.
 At present I
order to deduce therefrom the fundamental division of the _calculus of
the complete solution of any one mathematical question, is invariably

In this connexion, and in the logical order of ideas, the transcendental
general object is to facilitate the establishment of equations, an
equations, which is the object of the ordinary analysis.
is exceedingly important to conceive in this way the true relations of
with the regular usage, to study the transcendental analysis after
logically independent of the latter, or, at least, may be essentially
solution of questions has always more or less need of being completed by
questions in suspense if this latter had not been previously studied.

_Corresponding Divisions of the Calculus of Functions.
the preceding considerations that the _Calculus of Functions_, or
of two distinct fundamental branches, one of which has for its immediate
between the magnitudes themselves which are under consideration; and the
quantities indirectly connected with those of the problem, has for its
analytical methods, of the corresponding equations between the direct
the domain of the preceding calculus.

Analysis_, or of _Algebra_, properly so called.
what is called the _Transcendental Analysis_, which has been designated
Fluxions and of Fluents_, _Calculus of Vanishing Quantities_, the
, according to the point of

In order to remove every foreign consideration, I will propose to name
of CALCULUS OF DIRECT FUNCTIONS.
essentially by generalizing and epitomizing the ideas of Lagrange, are
belonging to each of these two forms of analysis.

analysis, I have next to consider separately each of its two parts,
extended developments for the different branches of the _Calculus of




ORDINARY ANALYSIS, OR ALGEBRA.

The _Calculus of direct Functions_, or _Algebra_, is (as was shown at
of mathematical questions, when they are so simple that we can form
considering, without its being necessary to introduce in their place, or
the first.
use requires to be preceded and prepared by that of the _Calculus of
of equations.
perform, it has none the less a necessary part in the complete solution
continue to be, by its nature, the fundamental base of all mathematical
 We must therefore, before going any further, consider in a
of development to which it has at the present day arrived.

_Its Object.
(properly so called) of _equations_, that is, the discovery of the
quantities, in accordance with the _equations_ which exist between them,
truly distinct classes of equations.
consequently rigorously indefinite, the number of analytical functions
although they are composed of only a very small number of primitive


_ The rational classification of equations
which their numbers are composed; every other classification would be
 Accordingly, analysts begin by dividing equations
contain functions of only the first three couples (see the table in
, page 51), or as they include also exponential or circular
 The names of _Algebraic_ functions and _Transcendental_
elements, are undoubtedly very inappropriate.
established division between the corresponding equations is none the
containing the functions called _transcendental_ necessarily presents
 Hence
frequently the resolution of the most simple of them is still unknown to
elaboration of the latter.



  the extreme imperfection of this part of algebra.


ALGEBRAIC EQUATIONS.

Considering now only these _Algebraic_ equations, we must observe, in
functions of the unknown quantities as well as _rational_ functions, we
come under the second, so that it is with this last that analysts have
_algebraic_ equations.

_Their Classification.
classed according to the number of their terms.
was evidently faulty, since it separated cases which were really
this unimportant characteristic.
equations with two terms, which are, in fact, capable of being resolved

  [Footnote 8: The same error was afterward committed, in the infancy
  differential equations.

on the other hand, eminently natural, for this distinction rigorously
 This
resolved; but it may be indicated in a general manner independently of
 We need only consider that the most general
different inferior degrees, as must also the formula which determines
 Consequently, however slight we may suppose the
is inevitably complicated in the execution with those presented by all
obstacles, in proportion as the degree of the equation is elevated.


ALGEBRAIC RESOLUTION OF EQUATIONS.

_Its Limits.
us only in the four first degrees, such is the increase of difficulty
 In this respect, algebra has made no considerable
sixteenth century, although in the last two centuries there has been
to advance the resolution of equations.
fifth degree itself has thus far resisted all attacks.

equations must necessarily present, in proportion as the degree
rendering it almost inapplicable), has determined analysts to renounce,
far from regarding it as impossible to obtain the resolution of


_ The only question of this kind which would be really
general resolution of algebraic equations of any degree whatsoever.
the more we meditate on this subject, the more we are led to think, with
 We
an equation of the _m^{th}_ degree would necessarily include radicals of
of the _m_ determinations which it must admit.
besides, that this formula must also embrace, as a particular case, that
would inevitably also contain radicals of the next lower degree, the
, so that, even if it were possible to discover
capable of being usefully employed, unless we could succeed in
introduction of a new class of analytical elements of which we yet have
 We have, then, reason to believe that, without having already
intelligence, we should not be long in reaching them if we actively and

It is, besides, important to observe that, even supposing we had
we would still have treated only a very small part of _algebra_,
including the resolution of all the equations which can be formed by the

Finally, we must remember that, by an undeniable law of human nature,
resources for resolving them, or, in other words, the human mind being
remain _below_ the difficulty, no matter to what degree of development
 Thus, even though we should some day
present known, chimerical as the supposition is, there can be no doubt
means, we would have already overcome the difficulty (a much smaller
introduction of which would give rise to classes of equations of which,
in algebraic science would be continually reproduced, in spite of the


_ In the present condition of algebra, the
binomial equations, of certain particular equations of the higher
circular equations, constitute the fundamental methods which are
mathematical problems.
have nevertheless succeeded in treating, in a truly admirable manner, a
of the volume.
the total system of mathematical analysis, have had for their principal
instead of tending to increase it.
obtained, that most frequently this calculus has no real share in the
those which have reference to equations of the two first degrees, with





equations, has led analysts to occupy themselves with a new class of
 They have busied
equations of the higher degrees, by what they have named the _numerical
 Not being able to obtain, in general, the
the unknown one is, they have sought (in the absence of this kind of
of that formula, at least the _value_ of each unknown quantity, for
quantities.
illegitimate operation, which presents an intimate mixture of truly
rendered possible in all cases for equations of any degree and even of
 The methods for this which we now possess are sufficiently
complicated as to render it almost impossible to execute them.
nothing else to do, then, in this part of algebra, but to simplify the
hope hereafter to effect.
functions, we endeavour, in its application, so to dispose the proposed
equations.

_Its limited Usefulness.
of the veritable solution, it is essential not to misconceive the true
imperfect algebra.
our mathematical questions to depend finally upon only the _numerical_
isolated or truly final, that is, for the smallest number.
questions, in fact, are only preparatory, and intended to serve as an
 Now, for
unknown quantity which it is important to discover, but the _formula_,
consideration.
extensive class of cases, whenever a certain question includes at the
 We have then, first of all, to
 By suitably employing the simple and general method so
other unknown quantities to one of them, the difficulty would always
equations under consideration, while the _numerical_ solution would then
 It is only for want of knowing the _algebraic_
obliged to treat _Elimination_ as a distinct question, which forms one
 Laborious as are
not even applicable, in an entirely general manner, to the elimination

In the most simple questions, and when we have really to resolve only a
resolution is none the less a very imperfect method, even when it is
 It presents, in fact, this serious inconvenience of
change which may take place in a single one of the quantities
the calculations made for one case not enabling us to dispense with any
 This happens
algebraic part of the question which is common to all the cases which

According to the preceding considerations, the calculus of direct
branches, according as its subject is the _algebraic_ resolution of
 The first department, the
probably always remain so; the second, too often insufficient, has, at
 The necessity of
essentially different object proposed in each, and consequently the


_ If, moreover, we
each is composed, we find in their logical distribution an entirely
 In fact, the first part must be divided according
independently of every consideration relative to the _values_ of the
 In the second part, on the contrary, it is not
naturally distinguished, since they are applicable to equations of any
_values_ of the unknown quantities; for, in calculating these numbers
would evidently be employed when the numbers are not susceptible of
approximations, always incomplete, or when they can be obtained with
 This distinction of _incommensurable_ and of
their determination, important as it is in the numerical resolution of
which the _rational_ or _irrational_ nature of the numbers which are
any influence over the methods employed; it is, in a word, a simple
 We may say as much, though in a less degree,
_fractional_.
with the most general classification of roots, as _real_ and
 All these different considerations, which are preponderant
importance in their algebraic resolution, render more and more sensible





calculus of direct functions, are subordinate to a third one, purely
resources, and which has been very exactly designated by the general
_Algebraic_ equations.
its generality, has special need of this rational foundation.

orders of questions, viz.
equations, and those which concern their _transformation_; these latter
knowing them, in accordance with any given law, providing that this law
[9]
  [Footnote 9: The fundamental principle on which reposes the theory
  mathematical analysis--the decomposition of algebraic, rational,
  first degree--is never employed except for functions of a single
  extended to functions of several variables.
  impossibility of such a decomposition is demonstrated by the author
]




parts of the calculus of direct functions, I must, lastly, mention
proper, that relating to the transformation of functions into series by

of the most remarkable discoveries of Descartes, has undoubtedly lost
infinitesimal calculus, the place of which it might so happily take in
 But the increasing extension of the
necessary, has, on the other hand, multiplied its applications and
two theories, which has finally been effected, the use of the method of
than it was even before the formation of the calculus of indirect

       *       *       *       *       *
Having thus sketched the general outlines of algebra proper, I have now
of direct functions, our ideas of which may be advantageously made more





algebraic calculations sometimes lead, and especially to the expressions
metaphysical considerations, which have been forced upon them, in the
simple analytical facts.
the spirit of mathematical analysis consists in considering magnitudes
determinate value, analysts are obliged to admit indifferently every

singularity would destroy the generality of their conceptions.
common embarrassment on this subject seems to me to proceed essentially
idea of _value_, or, what comes to the same thing, between the
 A thorough examination
than even mathematicians commonly suppose.


NEGATIVE QUANTITIES.

As to negative quantities, which have given rise to so many misplaced
_abstract_ signification and their _concrete_ interpretation, which have
 Under the first
complete manner by a single algebraical consideration.
admitting such expressions is the same as for imaginary quantities, as
render the formulas more comprehensive, is a mechanism of calculation
 We may
nothing essential to desire; it presents no obstacles but those

It is far from being so, however, with their concrete theory.
consists essentially in that admirable property of the signs + and-, of
magnitudes are susceptible.
the concrete to the abstract in mathematics is one of the most beautiful
a simple result of properly directed philosophical observation.
number of geometers have since striven to establish directly its general
 Their vain
and the concrete have so confused the subject, that it becomes necessary
 It consists in this: if,
which are susceptible of opposition of directions, one or more of those
belonged to them when the equation was first established, it will not be
phenomena; it will suffice to change, in the first equation, the sign of
equation, thus modified, will always rigorously coincide with that which
case, the analytical law of the phenomenon.
in this constant and necessary coincidence.
succeeded in directly proving this; we have assured ourselves of it only
are, it is true, sufficiently multiplied, and especially sufficiently
exactitude and the generality of this essential property, but which, in
for so important an explanation.
make us comprehend both the fundamental difficulties of this research
would belong to the general conception of this great truth.
imperfection of theory, however, has not prevented geometers from making
parts of concrete mathematics.

of any demonstration, that the property of which we speak must never be
giving rise to a simple opposition of direction; in that case, the sign
susceptible of any concrete interpretation, and the attempts sometimes
 This circumstance occurs, among
diverging forces in mechanics.


PRINCIPLE OF HOMOGENEITY.

A second general theorem on the relation of the concrete to the abstract
Homogeneity_.
than the preceding, but it particularly merits our attention as having,
phenomena without distinction, and because of the real utility which it
 I can,
to me very simple.
self-evident, that the exactitude of every relation between any concrete
which they are referred for the purpose of expressing them in numbers.
For example, the relation which exists between the three sides of a
or by miles, or by inches.

expresses the analytical law of any phenomenon must possess this
found in it are made to undergo simultaneously the change corresponding
 Now this change
_m_ times smaller, if the unit which corresponds to them becomes _m_
 Thus every equation which represents any
the same, when we make _m_ times greater all the quantities which it
exists; excepting always the numbers which designate simply the mutual
invariable during the change of the units.
constitutes the law of Homogeneity in its most extended signification,

But most frequently we consider only the cases in which the functions
applicable.
proposition by determining the analytical character which must be
be verified.
explained, all the _terms_ of the first degree, whatever may be their
times greater; all those of the second degree, _m²_ times; those of the
 Thus the terms of the same degree, however
terms of different degrees varying in an unequal proportion, whatever
prevent the equation from being disturbed, that all the terms which it
 It is in this that properly
circumstance that the general law has derived its name, which, however,

In order to treat this subject in its whole extent, it is important to
applying this property when the phenomenon expressed by the equation
 Thus it may happen that the
theorem of Homogeneity will hold good, either with reference to all the
or more of them.
different units will have fixed relations to one another, determined by
to this subordination of the units in verifying the homogeneity, which
form of which will vary according to the nature of the phenomena.
for example, to fix our ideas, when, in the analytical expression of
volumes, it will be necessary to observe that the three corresponding
the subordination generally established in that respect, when the first
_m³_ times.
in the equations, in which, if they are _algebraic_, we will have to
factors which correspond to areas, and tripling those of the factors

       *       *       *       *       *
Such are the principal general considerations relating to the _Calculus
 We have now to pass to the philosophical
importance and extent of which claim a fuller development.


CHAPTER III.




transcendental analysis, in whatever manner it may be conceived,
of mathematical science.
under several points of view, really distinct, although necessarily
 They may be reduced
of which all the others are only secondary modifications.
state of science, each of these three general conceptions offers
yet succeeded in constructing a single method uniting all these
 This combination will probably be
Lagrange when that important philosophical labour shall have been
historic interest; but, until then, the science must be considered as in
of all the various modes of viewing this calculus.
appear this multiplicity of conceptions of one identical subject, still,
analysis, whether in itself, or more especially in relation to its
 This want of system in the most important part of
hand, its great extent and its superior difficulty, and, on the other,





formation of the transcendental analysis, it would be necessary
functions_, properly so called, the original idea of the _infinitesimal
_calculus_.
the procedure constantly employed by the Greek geometers, under the name
properties of straight lines to those of curves, and consisting
an inscribed or circumscribed polygon, by means of which they rose to
primitive ratios.
be giving it a greatly exaggerated importance to see in this method of
have done; for the ancients had no logical and general means for the
difficulty of the question; so that their solutions were not subjected
lead with certainty to the knowledge sought; which is, on the contrary,
 In a word,
the ancients, and, more especially, by considering it in a manner purely
them was impossible.

great geometer Fermat, whom Lagrange has justly presented as having
method for the determination of _maxima_ and _minima_, and for the
auxiliary consideration of the correlative increments of the proposed
equations had undergone certain suitable transformations.
Fermat was the first to conceive this analysis in a truly abstract
distinct calculus having its own notation, and especially freed from the
were finally not taken into the account, after having nevertheless
 This is what
intermediate modifications of the ideas of Fermat introduced by Wallis,
transcendental analysis, such as we now employ it.
discovery was so ripe (like all the great conceptions of the human
side, had arrived, at the same time, or a little earlier, at a method
point of view, which, although more logical in itself, is really less
facility which have been imparted to it by the ideas of Leibnitz.
Finally, Lagrange, putting aside the heterogeneous considerations which
transcendental analysis, in its greatest perfection, to a purely
applications.

analysis, we will proceed to the dogmatic exposition of the three
characteristic properties, and to show the necessary identity of the
 Let us begin with that of Leibnitz.


METHOD OF LEIBNITZ.

_Infinitely small Elements.
calculus, in order to facilitate the establishment of equations, the
between which are sought, are considered to be composed.
or _differentials_ will have certain relations to one another, which are
of the primitive quantities, and by means of which we will be enabled
these auxiliary infinitesimals) to go back to the desired equations,

when there is too much difficulty in forming immediately the equation
second application of the same general artifice will have to be made,
quantities, and a relation be sought between their infinitely small
will be _second differentials_), and so on; the same transformation
finally eliminating the constantly increasing number of infinitesimal

A person not yet familiar with these considerations does not perceive at
discovery of the analytical laws of phenomena; for the infinitely small
them, it would seem that their relations should not be obtained with
in fact, exercise any influence on an inquiry which is necessarily
 But it is easy,
how far the question must be simplified by such an artifice.
purpose, it is necessary to begin by distinguishing _different orders_
obtained by considering them as being either the successive powers of
which may be regarded as having finite ratios with these powers; so
, differentials of any
order, the third, &c.
multiples of the second, third, &c.
differential.
the infinitesimal analysis consists in constantly neglecting the
generally the infinitely small quantities of any order whatever in
 It is at once apparent
between the differentials of quantities, since, in the place of these
and as will be more simple to consider, only taking care to conform to
ones only by quantities infinitely small in comparison with them.
thus that it will be possible, in geometry, to treat curved lines as
formed of plane elements, and, in mechanics, variable motions as an
small intervals of time.

EXAMPLES.
think that I ought here to complete the illustration of its fundamental


 _Tangents.
plane curve, the equation of which is given, the direction of its
the inventors of the transcendental analysis.
tangent as a secant joining two points infinitely near to each other;
of the co-ordinates of those two points, the elementary principles of
trigonometrical tangent of the angle which is made with the axis of the
fixing its position in a system of rectilinear co-ordinates.
equation, common to all curves, being established, the question is
eliminating the infinitesimals _dx_ and _dy_, which were introduced as
equation of the proposed curve, the ratio of _dy_ to _dx_, which will be


 _Rectification of an Arc.
to know the length of the arc of any curve, considered as a function of
 It would be impossible to establish
it is easy to find the corresponding relation between the differentials
 The most simple theorems of elementary
_ds_ as a right line, the equations
  _ds²_ = _dy²_ + _dx²_, or _ds²_ = _dx²_ + _dy²_ + _dz²_,
according as the curve is of single or double curvature.
the question is now entirely within the domain of analysis, which, by
the calculus of indirect functions), will carry us back from this
under examination.

3.
_ It would be the same with the quadrature of
 If the curve is a plane one, and referred to
this curve, the axis of the abscissas, and two extreme co-ordinates, to
corresponding increment of the abscissa.
differentials can be immediately obtained with the greatest facility by
rectangle formed by the extreme ordinate and the element of the
quantity of the second order.
the curve, the very simple differential equation
  _d_A = _ydx_,
from which, when the curve is defined, the calculus of indirect
immediate object of the problem.

4.
_ In like manner, in Dynamics, when we
by a body impressed with a motion varying according to any law, we will
of the time _t_, and we will thus immediately form the differential
when the body has passed over the space _e_; and thence it will be easy
which would give the velocity in each particular motion, in accordance
reciprocally, what this relation would be if the mode of variation of
or to the time.

5.
_ Lastly, to indicate another kind of
thermological phenomena, according to the happy conception of M.
Fourier, to form in a very simple manner the general differential
whatever, subjected to any influences, by means of the single and
heat in a right-angled parallelopipedon, considering (geometrically)
similar form, and (thermologically) the flow of heat as constant during
 Henceforth, all the questions which
and mechanics, to mere difficulties of analysis, which will always
auxiliaries to facilitate the establishment of the equations.

clear general idea of the immense scope of the fundamental conception of
undoubtedly does, the most lofty thought to which the human mind has as

It is evident that this conception was indispensable to complete the
broad and fruitful manner, the relation of the concrete to the abstract.
In this respect it must be regarded as the necessary complement of the
representation of natural phenomena: an idea which did not begin to be
the infinitesimal analysis, without which it could not produce, even in


_ Besides the admirable facility which is
mathematical laws of all phenomena, a second fundamental and inherent
of the differential formulas, which express in a single equation each
it is considered.
differential equation gives the tangents of all curves, another their
invariable formula expresses the mathematical law of every variable
distribution of heat in any body and for any case.
which is so exceedingly remarkable, and which is for geometers the basis
consequence of the very spirit of the transcendental analysis,
 Thus the infinitesimal
equations which it would have been impossible to discover in a direct
study of natural phenomena, a new order of more general laws, which
habituated to their interpretation.
characteristic property, the entire system of an immense science, such
analytical formulas, from which the human mind can deduce, by certain


_ To complete the general exposition of the
of the logical procedure to which it leads, and this, unfortunately, is

In the beginning of the infinitesimal analysis, the most celebrated
discovery of Leibnitz and multiplying its applications than to
 They
second-rate geometers by the unhoped-for solution of the most difficult
than in any other, we may boldly welcome new methods, even when their
results, inasmuch as its much easier and more numerous verifications
 But this state
very foundations of the analysis of Leibnitz in order to prove, in a
employed in this method, in spite of the apparent infractions of the

Leibnitz, urged to answer, had presented an explanation entirely
_incomparables_, and that he neglected them in comparison with finite
which would have completely changed the nature of his analysis, by
view, would be radically vicious, since it would be impossible to
increase these first errors, which could thus evidently attain any
 Leibnitz, then, did not see, except in a very confused manner,
 His
exactitude by showing the conformity of its results, in particular
the ancients; reproducing, according to the ancient methods, so far as
obtained by the new method, which alone was capable of discovering them

When this great question was considered in a more general manner,
elude it in some way, as Euler and D'Alembert, for example, have done,
of Leibnitz, viewed in all its applications, with other fundamental
the exactitude of which was free from any objection.
verification is undoubtedly strictly sufficient to dissipate any

all its applications, such a practical superiority over the other
would be a real imperfection in the philosophical character of the
founded on considerations of another order, which would then cease to be

It was, then, of real importance to establish directly and in a general
 After
Carnot, presented at last the true direct logical explanation of the
necessary compensation of errors, this being, in fact, the precise and
perceived.
although, as we shall see towards the end of this chapter, all this
very probably susceptible of only a provisional existence, inasmuch as
 Still, we should not fail to
directly legitimate the analysis of Leibnitz.
it:
In establishing the differential equation of a phenomenon, we
considered, other simpler infinitesimals, which differ from them
constitutes the principal artifice of the method of Leibnitz, which
equations.
error in the equation thus obtained, and which for this reason he calls

differentiation or of integration, which are performed upon these
eliminating all the infinitesimals which have been introduced as
other analogous errors, so that an exact compensation takes place, and
 Carnot
establishment of this necessary compensation, the complete elimination
the final object of all the operations of the transcendental analysis;
reasoning than those thus exacted by the very nature of the
have engendered other than infinitely small errors in all the equations,
they exist between finite quantities alone, since the only errors then
 All this
quantities, regarded as indefinitely decreasing, while those from which


_ Thus, to illustrate this abstract exposition
which is the most easy to analyze completely.
equation _t_ = _dy/dx_, obtained above, as being affected with an
the secant.
the equation of each curve, the ratio between the differentials of the
 If we suppose this equation to be _y_ = _ax²_, we shall


In this formula we shall have to neglect the term _dx²_ as an infinitely
 Then the combination of the two

  _t_ = _dy/dx_, _dy_ = 2_ax(dx)_,
being sufficient to eliminate entirely the infinitesimals, the finite
effect of the exact compensation of the two errors committed; since, by
and this is, nevertheless, the only one which it could have, according

It would be easy to reproduce in a uniform manner the same reasoning
Leibnitz.

examine it more profoundly; but it has really no other radical logical
seems to me, the natural development and the general explanation, so
to employ this method directly.


conceptions of the transcendental analysis, limiting myself in each to
been sufficiently determined above in the examination of the conception
being most easily grasped as a whole, and most rapidly described.


METHOD OF NEWTON.

Newton has successively presented his own method of conceiving the
 That which is at
under the name of the _Method of prime and ultimate Ratios_, sometimes


_ The general spirit of the transcendental analysis,
place of the primitive quantities, or concurrently with them, in order
of the simultaneous increments of these quantities; or, in other words,
be easily shown to have a determinate and finite value.
calculus, which is the equivalent of the infinitesimal calculus, is then
corresponding equations between the primitive quantities themselves.

ease the mathematical laws of phenomena, depends in general on this,
proposed quantities, but to the limits of the ratios of those
magnitude more easy to consider, provided that their final ratio is the
unity.
way affected by this substitution.
nearly the equivalent of the facilities offered by the analysis of

polygons, variable motions as the _limits_ of a collection of uniform


 1.
_ Suppose, for example, that we wish to determine
towards which would tend a secant, which should turn about the given
approach the first.
the two points by Δ_y_ and Δ_x_, we would have at each instant, for the
axis of abscissas,
  _t_ = Δ_y_/Δ_x_;
from which, taking the limits, we will obtain, relatively to the tangent


 The
in each particular case, when the equation of the curve is given, the
which have been introduced.
solution, that the equation of the proposed curve is _y_ = _ax²_, we




Now it is clear that the _limit_ towards which the second number tends,
 We shall therefore find, by
method of Leibnitz.

 _Rectifications.
is desired, we must substitute for the increment of the arc s the chord
limit of their ratio is unity; and then we find (pursuing in other
equation of rectifications:
  (_LΔs_/Δ_x_)² = 1 + (_LΔy_/Δ_x_)²,

 It will now be
between the arc and the abscissa, which depends on the transcendental

We could take up, with the same facility, by the method of limits, all
indicated according to the infinitesimal method.

transcendental analysis, or, more precisely, that which Maclaurin and
in seeking to fix and to arrange the ideas of Newton upon that subject.

_Fluxions and Fluents.
presented this same method should be here noticed, and deserves
some cases as by its having furnished the notation best suited to this
been till lately the special form of the calculus of indirect functions
 I refer to the calculus of
_velocities_.

every curve as generated by a point impressed with a motion varying
 The different quantities which the curve
, will be
motion.
called the _fluxion_ of that quantity, which will be inversely named its
 Henceforth the transcendental analysis will consist, according
fluxions of the proposed quantities, in order to deduce therefrom, by a
 What
any magnitudes whatever, regarded, by the aid of suitable images, as

It is easy to understand the general and necessary identity of this

always may, that the motion of the describing point is uniform in a
of the abscissa will be constant, like the element of the time; for all
uniform, except for an infinitely small time.
general according to its mechanical conception, the ratio of each space
proportional to the increment of the abscissa, it follows that the
, are really
final ratios of the increments of these different quantities to the
 This method of fluxions and fluents is, then,
mechanics, the method of prime and ultimate ratios, which alone can be
 It evidently, then, offers the same general
analysis, without its being necessary to present special proofs of





_ The conception of Lagrange, in its admirable
great algebraic artifice, by which, in order to facilitate the
functions, or concurrently with them, their _derived_ functions; that
first term of the increment of each function, arranged according to the
 The special calculus
the conceptions of Leibnitz and of Newton, to eliminate these
deduce from their relations the corresponding equations between the


_ The transcendental analysis is,
ordinary analysis.
analytical investigations, in the place of the magnitudes themselves
or their sines, &c.
obtain them more easily.
the same nature, only of greater extent, and procuring, in consequence,

But, although we can readily conceive, _à priori_, that the auxiliary
of equations, it is not easy to explain why this _must_ necessarily
transformation.

abstract manner, but only shown by considering separately each principal


 _Tangents.
analysis may be best illustrated by its application to the most simple

Instead of conceiving the tangent as the prolongation of the infinitely
the limit of the secants, according to the ideas of Newton--Lagrange
to the definitions of the ancients, to be a right line such that no
the curve.
expression of its distance from the curve, measured in any direction
arbitrary constant relating to the inclination of the right line, which
diminish that separation as much as possible.
evidently equal to the difference of the two ordinates of the curve and
will be represented by the formula
  (_f'_(_x_) - _t_)_h_ + _qh²_ + _rh³_ + etc.

of the angle which the required line makes with the axis of abscissas,
 This being
the first term of the preceding formula equal to zero, we will render
line for which _t_ did not have the value thus determined would
 We have, then, for
_f'_(_x_), a result exactly equivalent to those furnished by the
 We have yet to find
analysis, quite identical with those which are presented, at this stage

After these considerations upon the principal general conceptions, we
_Calculus of Vanishing Quantities_, which are really modifications--more
methods.

three fundamental methods.
first to be proven in a general manner.


FUNDAMENTAL IDENTITY OF THE THREE METHODS.

It is, in the first place, evident from what precedes, considering these
preliminary ideas, that they all consist in the same general logical
the introduction of a certain system of auxiliary magnitudes, having
and substituted for them expressly to facilitate the analytical
finally to be eliminated by the aid of a special calculus.
which has determined me to regularly define the transcendental analysis
philosophical character, at the same time avoiding any discussion upon
 The general effect of
mathematical question much more promptly within the power of the
which is usually presented by the passage from the concrete to the
 Whatever progress we may make, we can never hope that the
philosophy, geometrical, or mechanical, or thermological, &c.
immediately upon its birth, which would evidently involve a
 Every problem will constantly require a certain
assistance, and which, by its nature, cannot be subjected to abstract
establishment of equations, which form the indispensable starting point
 But this preliminary labour has been
which has thus hastened the moment at which the solution admits of the
reducing, in each case, this special labour to the investigation of
leads to equations directly referring to the proposed magnitudes, which,
directly and separately.
_differential_ equations, according to the idea of Leibnitz, or
lastly, _derived_ equations, according to the theory of Lagrange, the

But the coincidence of these three principal methods is not limited to
manner of obtaining it.
place of the primitive magnitudes, certain auxiliary ones, but, still
identical in the three methods, which consequently differ only in the
 This can be easily shown by taking for the
that of Lagrange, which is the most suitable to serve as a type, as
 Is it not evident, by the
what Leibnitz calls _differential coefficients_, or the ratios of the
since, in determining the first differential, we will be obliged, by the
the only term of the increment of the function which contains the first
way, is not the derived function, by its nature, likewise the necessary
primitive function and that of its variable, in proportion as this last
becomes when we suppose the increment of the variable to equal zero?
which ought to be noted as _L_(Δ_y_/Δ_x_) in that of Newton; and that
function, seen from three different points of view, the considerations
necessary properties of the derived function.
analysis, examined abstractedly and in its principle, is then always the
procedures of the calculus of indirect functions are necessarily
application whatever, lead constantly to rigorously uniform results.


COMPARATIVE VALUE OF THE THREE METHODS.

If now we endeavour to estimate the comparative value of these three
inconveniences which are peculiar to it, and which still prevent
final.

_That of Leibnitz.
in all its applications, a very marked superiority, by leading in a much
of equations between the auxiliary magnitudes.
owe the high perfection which has been acquired by all the general
 Whatever may be the different
method, in an abstract point of view, all tacitly agree in employing it
not to complicate the necessary difficulty by this purely artificial
expeditious course.
transcendental analysis on new foundations, has (with that noble
decisive homage to the characteristic properties of the conception of
_Méchanique Analytique_.

But when we consider the conception of Leibnitz in itself and in its
radically vicious in this, that, adopting its own expressions, the
in fact impossible to obtain a clear conception, however we may deceive
 Even if we adopt the ingenious idea of the
inconvenience of being obliged to distinguish in mathematics two classes
designedly commit errors which subsequently have to be compensated.
conception which leads to such strange consequences is undoubtedly very

To say, as do some geometers, that it is possible in every case to
of which is irreproachable, would evidently be to elude the difficulty
strips the conception of Leibnitz of its essential advantages of

Finally, even disregarding the preceding important considerations, the
very serious defect of breaking the unity of abstract mathematics, by
from those which form the basis of the ordinary analysis.
of analysis into two worlds almost entirely independent of each other,

to the state of the science before Lagrange had established a general


_ Passing now to the conception of Newton, it is evident
objections which are called forth by the method of Leibnitz.
of _limits_ is, in fact, remarkable for its simplicity and its
 In the transcendental analysis presented in this manner, the
rules of reasoning are as constantly observed as in ordinary analysis.
But, on the other hand, it is very far from offering such powerful
 The
magnitudes separately and by themselves, nor even in their ratios, but
of the mind in the formation of auxiliary equations.
that it greatly embarrasses the purely analytical transformations.
the transcendental analysis, considered separately from its
generality which have been imprinted upon it by the conception of
 It is very difficult, for example, to extend the theory of
 But it is
inferiority of this theory is most strongly marked.

more logical basis of the transcendental analysis, have partially
applying to this method the notation invented by Leibnitz for the
 In
limits, to be denoted by _L_(Δ_y_/Δ_x_), and in extending to all the
undoubtedly, to combine the special advantages of the two methods; but,
between them, a familiarity with which hinders the formation of clear
 It would certainly be singular, considering
possible to effect a veritable combination between two theories so

Finally, the method of limits presents also, though in a less degree,
infinitesimal method, of establishing a total separation between the
though clear and rigorous, is none the less in itself, as Lagrange has
dependent.

_That of Lagrange.
abstract character of its fundamental notions, are found in the highest
for this reason, the most rational and the most philosophical of all.
Carefully removing every heterogeneous consideration, Lagrange has
of presenting a very extensive class of analytical transformations,
of various problems.
presented as a simple extension of ordinary analysis; it is only a
 All the different parts of abstract mathematics,
conceived as forming a single system.

independently of its so simple and so lucid notation, and which is
analysis, because of its high philosophical superiority over all the
difficulties in its applications, as compared with the conception of
adopted.
rediscovering, by his method, the principal results already obtained by
geometry and mechanics; we may judge from that what obstacles would be
important.
that difficulties call forth, from men of genius, superior efforts,
 It was thus that, in trying
seemed so far from admitting its application, he arrived at that
important part of geometry.
conception of Lagrange has nevertheless remained, as a whole,

The final result of the general comparison which I have too briefly
understand the transcendental analysis, we should not only consider it
Leibnitz, of Newton, and of Lagrange, but should besides accustom
principal methods, and especially according to the first and the last,
indirect functions or of its applications.
could not too strongly recommend to all those who desire to judge
to those who wish to learn to make use of this powerful instrument with
 In all the other parts of mathematical
questions may be useful, even independently of its historical interest,
necessary.

character of the calculus of indirect functions, according to the
consider, in the following chapter, the logical division and the general









considerations explained in the preceding chapter, is necessarily
different _calculi_ entirely distinct, although intimately connected by
the auxiliary magnitudes (the introduction of which constitutes the
corresponding primitive magnitudes; or, conversely, to try to discover
established.
transcendental analysis.

of view under which this analysis has been regarded.
method, properly so called, having been the most generally employed for
habitually the denominations of _Differential Calculus_ and of _Integral
rational consequences of his conception.
method, named the first the _Calculus of Fluxions_, and the second the
England.
by Lagrange, one would be called the _Calculus of Derived Functions_,
 I will continue to
formation of secondary expressions, although I ought, in accordance with
all the different conceptions, approaching as nearly as possible to that





calculus; for we do not and cannot know how to integrate directly any
differentiation of the ten simple functions which constitute the general
 The art of integration consists, then,
finally depend on only this small number of fundamental integrations.

characterized it in the preceding chapter, it is not at first apparent
independently of this necessary relation with the integral calculus,
indispensable.
the _derivatives_, introduced as auxiliaries to facilitate the
invariable object of the calculus of indirect functions, it is natural
equations between these auxiliary magnitudes, those which exist between
general wants of the transcendental analysis without our perceiving, at
inverse question can have in such an analysis.
though a common one, to assign to the differential calculus, in order to
of forming the differential equations, from which the integral calculus
formation of differential equations is not and cannot be, properly
by its nature the indispensable starting point of any calculus whatever.
How, in particular, could the differential calculus, which in itself is
equations, be a general procedure for establishing them? That which in
formation of equations, is the infinitesimal _method_, and not the
it is its indispensable complement.
give a false idea of the special destination which characterizes the
analysis.

importance of this first branch of the calculus of indirect functions,
general and essential object than to prepare indispensable foundations
 As the ideas on this matter are generally
important relation as I view it, and to show that in every application
constantly assigned to the differential calculus.

1.
Integral.
whatever, it is very seldom that we limit ourselves to introduce
 To
presented by the transcendental analysis for the expression of the
 Most frequently we introduce into the
relations are already known or supposed to be so, and without the
equations.
rectification of curves, the differential equation,
  _ds_² = _dy_² + _dx_², or _ds_² = _dx_² + _dy_² + _dz_²,
is not only established between the desired function s and the
time, there have been introduced, as indispensable intermediaries, the
among the data of the problem; it would not have been possible to form
peculiar to each curve considered.

immediately suitable for integration.
the differentials of the functions supposed to be known, which have
that equations may be obtained between the differentials of the
variables, after which the question depends on only the integral
 Now this preparatory elimination of certain differentials, in
belongs simply to the differential calculus; for it must evidently be
supposed to be known, taken as intermediaries, the relations of their
 Thus, for
calculate _dy_, or _dy_ and _dz_, by differentiating the equation or the
the general differential formula above enunciated will then contain only
infinitesimals can be completed only by the integral calculus.

differential calculus in the complete solution of the questions which
as is possible, the elimination of the infinitesimals, that is, to
shall contain only the differentials of the really independent
by elimination, the differentials of all the other known functions which
the differential equations of the problem which is under consideration.

2.
_ For certain
shall see hereafter, a very great importance, the magnitudes which are
primitive differential equations, which then contain differentially only
with the preceding explanation.
all; for it is evident that the differential calculus is then entirely
the question giving rise to any integration.
example, in the problem of _tangents_ in geometry; in that of


 _Employment of the Integral Calculus alone.
questions, the number of which is also very small, but the importance of
its nature exactly the converse of the preceding.
which the differential equations are found to be immediately ready for
infinitesimals which relate to the functions sought, or to the really
differentially, other functions as intermediaries.
we introduce these last functions, since, by hypothesis, they will enter
to eliminate them, and to bring the question to depend on only the
 The differential calculus will then have no special
upon the integral calculus.
an important example of this, for the differential equation being then
shall have eliminated, by means of the equation of the proposed curve,
differentially.
_cubatures_, and in some others equally important.

_Three classes of Questions hence resulting.
previous considerations, it is then necessary to divide into three
transcendental analysis; the _first_ class comprises the problems
calculus alone, without any need of the integral calculus; the _second_,
calculus, without the differential calculus having any part in their
constitutes the normal case, the two others being only exceptional, the
distinct and necessary part in the complete solution of the problem, the
which is indispensable for the application of the latter.
exactly their general relations, of which too indefinite and inexact

       *       *       *       *       *
Let us now take a general survey of the logical composition of each





intermingle with the purely analytical part (which reduces itself to the
the study of its different principal applications, especially those
 This confusion of ideas, which is a consequence
in the dogmatic point of view, serious inconveniences in this respect,
geometry.
is possible, I shall include, in the following sketch, only the calculus
this volume which relates to the philosophical study of _concrete_
mechanical applications.

_Two Cases: explicit and implicit Functions.
of the differential calculus, or of the general subject of
analytical functions which are to be differentiated are _explicit_ or
of differentiation _of formulas_ and differentiation _of equations_.
is easy to understand, _à priori_, the importance of this
 In fact, such a distinction would be illusory if the
equations algebraically, for then it would be possible to render every
state alone, the second part of the differential calculus would be
difficulty.
have seen, still almost in its infancy, and as yet impossible for most
properly speaking, to differentiate a function without knowing it,
 The differentiation of implicit functions
presented by explicit functions, and necessarily more complicated.
thus evident that we must commence with the differentiation of formulas,
certain invariable analytical considerations, which need not be here

These two general cases of differentiation are also distinct in another

more indirect, in comparison with that of the finite quantities, in the
functions.
Lagrange on the general formation of differential equations, that, on
less number of derived equations of very different forms, although at
eliminated, which is not the case in the differentiation of explicit
different primitive equations, which correspond to the same derived
the different functions, which admit of one same explicit differential,

more modified by differentiation than explicit functions.
meet with this consideration relatively to the integral calculus, where


_ Each of the two
very distinct theories, according as we are required to differentiate
variables.
first, and evidently presents more complication, even in considering
 As to
manner, by the aid of an invariable and very simple principle, which
produced by the simultaneous increments of the different independent
which would be produced by the separate increment of each variable in
 It is necessary, besides,
is introduced by the distinction of functions into those of one variable
derived functions, relating to each variable separately, and the number
derivation becomes higher, and also when the variables become more
 It results from this that the differential relations belonging
indirect, and especially much more indeterminate, than those relating to
 This is most apparent in the case of
constants which elimination causes to disappear when we form the proper
arbitrary functions of the proposed variables which are then eliminated;
integrated.

parts of the differential calculus proper, I should add, that in the
of several, it is necessary to make another distinction; that of the
functions of this kind, _combined_ in certain primitive equations, from

The functions are evidently, in fact, still more implicit in the first
ordinary analysis, which forbids our converting every implicit function
to separate the functions which enter simultaneously into any system of
 It is then necessary to differentiate, not only without
able to effect the proper eliminations among them, thus producing a new


Functions.
distribution of the different principal theories which compose the
 Since the differentiation of implicit
constant principle, and the differentiation of functions of several
a single variable, the whole of the differential calculus is finally
single variable, the only one which is ever executed directly.
easy to understand that this first theory, the necessary basis of the
functions, which are the uniform elements of all our analytical
on page 51; for the differentiation of compound functions is evidently
functions which compose them.
fundamental differentials, and to that of the two general principles
the whole system of differentiation is properly reduced.
combination of these different considerations, how simple and how
 It certainly
which mathematical analysis can present to our understanding.

_Transformation of derived Functions for new Variables.
sketch which I have just summarily drawn would nevertheless present an
theory, which forms, by its nature, the indispensable complement of the
 It is that which has for its object the
changes in the independent variables, whence results the possibility of
primitively established for others.
most complete and the most simple manner, as are all those of which the
 It is easy to conceive the general
transcendental analysis, the fundamental resources of which it may be
the differential equations, in the first place, with more ease) that
advantageous, although it is not to be finally retained.
example, that most of the principal questions of geometry are resolved
co-ordinates, and that we may, nevertheless, have occasion to express
, analytically by the aid of _polar_ co-ordinates, or
 We will then be able to commence the differential
an intermediate step, from which, by the general theory here referred
considered directly.

_Different Orders of Differentiation.
the differential calculus which has just been given, some may be
of its four essential parts according to another general consideration,
lower order of differentiation.
distinction has no real influence in the differential calculus, inasmuch
 If, indeed, the
not know how to differentiate at will any function whatever, the
function might engender special difficulties.
universality of the differential calculus plainly gives us the assurance
functions whatever, the question reducing itself to a constantly
 This distinction,
very great importance in the integral calculus, on account of the


_ Finally, though this is not the place to
exception may be made for those which consist in the solution of
logically treated in continuation of a system of differentiation,
 These

Firstly, the _development into series_ of functions of one or more
constitutes the most beautiful and the most important application of the
the fundamental series discovered by Taylor, the remarkable series
:
Secondly, the general _theory of maxima and minima_ values for any
interesting problems which analysis can present, however elementary it
differential calculus naturally applies:
Thirdly, the general determination of the true value of functions which
hypotheses made on the values of the corresponding variables; which is

The first question is certainly the principal one in all points of view;
especially by conceiving, in a broader manner than has yet been done,
functions, on which subject Lagrange has left some valuable hints.


points in the differential calculus, I now proceed to an equally rapid
called, that is, the abstract subject of integration.


THE INTEGRAL CALCULUS.

_Its Fundamental Division.
Calculus is founded on the same principle as that of the Differential
formulas, and the integration of _implicit_ differentials or of
 The separation of these two cases is even much
 In the
only on the extreme imperfection of ordinary analysis.
hand, it is easy to see that, even though all equations could be
constitute a case of integration quite distinct from that presented by
sake of simplicity, to the first order, and to a single function _y_ of
_x_, _y_, and _dy/dx_, to be resolved with reference to _dy/dx_, the
the primitive function itself, which is the object of the inquiry, the
solution will not really have made any other progress than that of
first degree relatively to the derived function, which is in itself of
 The differential would not then be determined in a
which would continue to present essentially the same characteristic
 The algebraic resolution of equations could not make the
explicit differentials, except in the special cases in which the
itself, which would consequently permit us, by resolving it, to find
class of quadratures.
found in differential equations of higher orders, or containing

The integration of differential equations is then necessarily more
which last the integral calculus has been created, and upon which the
 All the
differential equations, whether it be the separation of the variables,
, have in fact for their object to reduce
which, by its nature, can be undertaken directly.
imperfect as is still this necessary base of the whole integral
equations is still less advanced.

_Subdivisions: one variable or several.
branches of the integral calculus is next subdivided into two others (as
according as we consider functions with a _single variable_, or

This distinction is, like the preceding one, still more important for
 This is especially remarkable in
 Indeed, those which depend on
and much more serious difficulty, that the desired function may be
special derivatives relative to the different variables taken
 Hence results the most difficult and also the most extensive
Calculus of partial differences_, created by D'Alembert, and in which,
seen a really new calculus, the philosophical character of which has not
 A very striking
independent variable consists, as has been already observed, in the
constants, in order to give to the corresponding integrals all the

It is scarcely necessary to say that this higher branch of
the most simple case, that of an equation of the first order between the
we are not yet completely able to reduce the integration to that of the
 The integration of functions of several
indeed) in which it has to do with only explicit differential formulas.
We can then, in fact, when these formulas fulfil the necessary
quadratures.

_Other Subdivisions: different Orders of Differentiation.
distinction, applicable as a subdivision to the integration of explicit
the _higher or lower order of the differentials_: a distinction which,
the differential calculus.

several, the necessity of distinguishing their different orders belongs
 In fact, if
the integration of a formula of the second order, or of any other, would
the first degree, we would arrive at the differential expression of the
analogous integrations, we would be certain of finally arriving at the
 But the little
quite another state of affairs, so that a higher order of differentials
order above the first, it may happen that we may be able to integrate
be unable to go back to the primitive functions, if these preliminary
expressions whose integrals are not known.
so much the oftener (the number of known integrals being still very
different functions from the derivatives which have produced them.

still more important; for, besides the preceding reason, the influence
easy to perceive that the higher order of the differential equations
 In fact, even if we
function, that would not be sufficient for obtaining the final integral
equation is not reducible to that of an immediately inferior order.
Thus, for example, if we have given any relation between _x_, _y_,
_x_, we shall not be able to deduce from it at once, after effecting a
_y_, and _dy/dx_, from which, by a second integration, we could ascend
 This would not necessarily take place, at
equation of the second order did not contain the required function _y_,
 As a general principle, differential
and more _implicit_, as they are of a higher order, and which cannot be
investigation of which consequently forms a new class of questions, with
of a single variable.

  far been completely treated is the general integration of _linear_
 Even
  of a degree equal to the order of differentiation.

_ Still farther, when we examine more
equations, we find that it can be always made to come under a final
to be noticed.
variables may contain simply a single function, or (in a case evidently
differentiation of simultaneous implicit functions) we may have to
equations in which they are found united, together with their different
 It is clear that such a state of the question necessarily
functions desired, by forming for each, from the proposed differential
other functions or their derivatives.
analogous to the elimination of algebra, is evidently indispensable
generally (except by special artifices which are very rarely applicable)

Now it is easy to establish the exact and necessary coincidence of this
differential equations.
isolating functions in simultaneous differential equations consists
each function, and of an order equal to the sum of all those of the
 This transformation can always be
 On the other hand, every differential equation of any order in
first order, by introducing a suitable number of auxiliary differential
derivatives regarded as new functions to be determined.
indeed, sometimes been actually employed with success, though it is not

Here, then, are two necessarily equivalent orders of conditions in the
greater or smaller number of functions, and the higher or lower order of
 By augmenting the order of the
artificially multiplying the number of the functions, we can reduce all
 There is, consequently, in both cases,

real, and constitutes none the less, by its nature, a marked separation
equations of a higher order.
this last form as being more simple, more general, and more logical.

_Quadratures.
indicated respecting the logical dependence of the various principal
differential formulas of the first order and of a single variable is the
effecting but so far as we reduce them to this elementary case,
directly.
convenient expression of _quadratures_, seeing that every integral of
area of a curve, the equation of which in rectilinear co-ordinates would
 Such a class of questions corresponds, in the
explicit functions of a single variable.
by its nature, very differently complicated, and especially much more
 This latter is, in fact,
simple functions, the elements of all which are considered in analysis.
On the other hand, the integration of compound functions does not
of which may present special difficulties with respect to the integral
 Hence results the naturally indefinite extent, and the so
spite of all the efforts of analysts, we still possess so little

In decomposing this question, as is natural, according to the different
the case of _algebraic_ functions and that of _transcendental_

_Integration of Transcendental Functions.
integration of transcendental functions is as yet very little advanced,
functions.
kinds have as yet been treated, and those chosen from among the
extremely laborious.
remark in its philosophical connection is, that the different procedures
consist of simple artifices very incoherent with each other, and very

One of these artifices should, however, here be noticed, which, without
generality; it is the procedure invented by John Bernouilli, and known
integral may be reduced to another which is sometimes found to be more
 This ingenious relation deserves to be noticed for
transformation of integrals yet unknown, which has lately received a
 Fourier especially has made so new
of heat.

_ As to the integration of algebraic
 However, we know scarcely any thing
obtained only in extremely limited cases, and particularly by rendering
 The integration of rational functions is thus far the
in a truly complete manner; in a logical point of view, it forms, then,
 It is
imperfection of the integral calculus, that this case, limited as it is,
viewed in an abstract manner; for, in the execution, the theory finds
complication of the calculations, by the imperfection of ordinary
algebraic resolution of equations, which greatly limits its use.

which are employed in quadratures, we must observe that, by their
the ten simple functions.
establish as many direct theorems of the integral calculus, the only
 All the art of integration afterwards
all the other quadratures, so far as is possible, to this small number
effect.

_ In this systematic enumeration of the various
relations, I have designedly neglected (in order not to break the chain
a portion of the general theory of the integration of differential
speak, outside of the integral calculus, and being nevertheless of the
its applications.
differential equations, called sometimes, but improperly, _particular_
by Euler and Laplace, and of which Lagrange especially has presented
 Clairaut, who first had
integral calculus, since these solutions have the peculiarity of
corresponding general integrals.
paradox in the most ingenious and most satisfactory manner, by showing
variation of the arbitrary constants.
appreciate the importance of this theory, and it is with good reason
Functions.
attention by the character of perfect generality which it admits of,
finding the _singular_ solution of any differential equation which is
require no integration, consisting only of differentiations, and are
 Differentiation has thus become, by a
the imperfection of the integral calculus.
especially require, by their nature, the knowledge of these _singular_
which a curve is to be determined from any property of its tangent or
 In all cases of this kind, after having expressed
relations, the _singular_ equation which will form the most important
the general integral, which thenceforth it becomes unnecessary to know,
circles of this curve.
of this theory, which seems to me to be not as yet sufficiently

_Definite Integrals.
collection of analytical researches of which is composed the integral
very important in all the applications of the transcendental analysis,
destined for veritable integration, and proposing, on the contrary, to
are most generally unknown.
integrals_.

first be viewed as a happy general means of compensating for the extreme
 But the employment of such
discovering the law of their terms, is commonly of only moderate utility
relations have been thence deduced.
arithmetical point of view that this procedure acquires a great
integrals_, that is, the values of the required functions for certain

An inquiry of this nature exactly corresponds, in transcendental

opposition the _general_ or _indefinite_ integral; that is, the function
formula--analysts have been obliged to employ themselves in determining
which it would take on assigning certain designated values to the
 This is evidently resolving the arithmetical question without
generally is the most important one.
nature, as imperfect as we have seen the numerical resolution of
 It presents, like this last, a vicious confusion of
inconveniences both in the purely logical point of view and in the
 We need not here repeat the considerations suggested in
 But it will be understood that, unable as we almost
to have been able to obtain this solution, incomplete and necessarily
 Now this has been fortunately attained at the
integrals having been reduced to entirely general methods, which leave
the calculations, an object towards which are at present directed all
 Regarding now this sort of
applications is essentially reduced to making the proposed research
evidently cannot always be possible, whatever analytical skill may be


_ From the considerations indicated
constitutes by its nature a limited and perfect system, to which nothing
system of integration, presents necessarily an inexhaustible field for
applications of which the transcendental analysis is evidently
 The general argument by which I have endeavoured, in the
the algebraic solution of equations of any degree and form whatsoever,
single method of integration, invariably applicable to all cases.
is," says Lagrange, "one of those problems whose general solution we
" The more we meditate on this subject, the more we
far above the feeble reach of our intelligence; although the labours of
respecting integration, and thus create methods of greater generality.
The transcendental analysis is still too near its origin--there is
rational manner--for us now to be able to have a correct idea of what it
 But, whatever should be our legitimate hopes, let
our intellectual constitution, and which, though not susceptible of a

I am induced to think that, when geometers shall have exhausted the most
of striving to impress upon it, as now conceived, a chimerical
of derivation of the auxiliary quantities introduced in order to
might follow an infinity of other laws besides the very simple relation
first chapter.
a much greater fecundity than those which would consist of merely
 It is a
thoughts towards the general philosophy of analysis.

this chapter, I have had to exhibit the condition of extreme
would have a false idea of the general resources of the transcendental
 It is
of fundamental knowledge respecting the resolution of equations has been
 Little advanced as geometers
obtained, from their scanty abstract conceptions, the solution of a
mechanics, in thermology, &c.
double general fact results from the necessarily preponderating
which is naturally found to correspond to a crowd of _concrete_
his intellectual means than in the consideration of ideas more and more

       *       *       *       *       *
In order to finish the complete exposition of the philosophical
a final conception, by which the immortal Lagrange has rendered this
equations in the most difficult problems, by considering a class of
equations.
the general appreciation of which will be our next subject.


CHAPTER V.



_Method of Variations_, it will be well to begin by considering in a
resolution of which has rendered necessary the formation of this
 It is still too near its origin, and its
clear general idea of it from a purely abstract exposition of its





Variations_ consist generally in the investigation of the _maxima_ and
analytical law of such or such a phenomenon of geometry or mechanics,
 Geometers for a long
of _Isoperimetrical Problems_, which, however, is really suitable to


_ In the common theory of
given function of one or more variables, what particular values must be
the proposed function may be a _maximum_ or a _minimum_ with respect to
speaking, we seek to know at what instant the function ceases to
 The differential
of this class of questions, by showing that the values of the different
to zero the different first derivatives of the given function, taken
indicating, moreover, a suitable characteristic for distinguishing the
single variable, for example, in the derived function of the second
the minimum.
the greatest number of cases.

_A new Class of Questions.
having necessarily destroyed the chief interest which questions of this
consideration of a new order of problems, at once much more important
 It is, then,
minimum of a given function that it is required to determine.
form of the function itself_ which is required to be discovered, from
integral, merely indicated, which depends upon that function.

_Solid of least Resistance.
of _the solid of least resistance_, treated by Newton in the second book
curve of a solid of revolution, in order that the resistance experienced
 But
transcendental analysis, had not a character sufficiently simple,
geometers to this new order of problems.
of the infinitesimal method was needed; and this was done, in 1695, by
_Brachystochrone_.

questions, consists in determining the curve which a heavy body must
possible time.
the only case which was at first considered, it is easily found that the
with its origin at the highest point.
singularly complicated, either by taking into account the resistance of


_ Although this new class of problems was in the first
investigations of this character were subsequently made.
proposed to discover which, among all the curves of the same contour
minimum, whence has come the name of _Problem of Isoperimeters_; or it
produced by the revolution of the required curve about an axis, or to
the center of gravity of the unknown curve, or of the surface and of the
minimum, &c.
to infinity by the Bernouillis, by Taylor, and especially by Euler,
general method, the discovery of which has put a stop to the enthusiasm
 This is not the place for
 I have only enumerated some of the
general object of the method of variations.

_Analytical Nature of these Problems.
considered in an analytical point of view, consist, by their nature, in
variables ought to have, in order that such or such an integral,
value which is a maximum or a minimum with respect to all those which it

Thus, for example, in the problem of the _brachystochrone_, it is well
of the required curve, supposing the axes of _x_ and of _y_ to be
a heavy body in that curve from the point whose ordinate is _z₁_, to
definite integral
  ∫_{_z₂_}^{_z₁_}√(1 + (_f'(z))²_ + (π'(_z_))²/(2_gz_))_dz.

must be, in order that this integral may be a minimum.

isoperimetrical curves, which includes the greatest area, is the same
give a certain constant value to the integral
  ∫_dx_√(1 + (_f'(x)_ )²),
that one which renders the integral ∫_f(x)dx_, taken between the same
 It is evidently always so in other questions of this


_ In the solutions which geometers
reduce them to the ordinary theory of maxima and minima.
employed to effect this transformation consisted in special simple
admit of invariable and certain rules, so that every really new question
previously obtained being really of any essential aid, otherwise than by
 In a word, this branch of
exists when the part common to all questions of the same class has not
thenceforth general manner.


METHOD OF LAGRANGE.

Lagrange, in endeavouring to bring all the different problems of
distinct calculus, was led to conceive a new kind of differentiation, to
_d_ for the common differentials.
which he has designated under the name of _Variations_, consist of the
of analogous increments on the part of the corresponding variables, as
_form_ of the function placed under the sign of integration undergoes an
 This distinction is easily conceived with
of the curve, admit of two sorts of differentials, evidently very
near it on the same curve, or to the corresponding point of the
the first curve.
_variations_ of different magnitudes connected with each other by any
in the same manner as the differentials.
notion of _variations_ are in like manner deduced the fundamental
the evidently permissible liberty of transposing at will the
those which correspond to the ordinary differentials.

  curve with an other infinitely near to it, calling it
" But this comparison had no
  being embraced in the same general equation, from which they were
]
This abstract conception having been once formed, Lagrange was able to
_Isoperimeters_ to the simple ordinary theory of _maxima_ and _minima_.
To obtain a clear idea of this great and happy transformation, we must
different questions of isoperimeters.

_Two Classes of Questions.
divided into two general classes, according as the maxima and minima
expressions of geometers.

_Questions of the first Class.
indeterminate definite integrals, the maximum or minimum of which is
condition; as happens, for example, in the problem of the
imaginable curves.
the variable integrals can vary only according to certain conditions,
manner, upon the required functions) always retaining the same given
real _isoperimetrical_ figures, and in which, by the nature of the
area of the surface, must remain constant during the variation of that

The _Calculus of Variations_ gives immediately the general solution of
ordinary theory of maxima and minima, that the required relation must
to each independent variable; which gives the condition common to both
the one from the other, that the variation of the second order of the
minimum.
will have, in order to determine the nature of the curve sought, the


functions _f_ and π, which are independent of each other, will
 The
elimination of the characteristic δ, for which the calculus of
on the method of "integration by parts," from which Lagrange has thus
 The constant object of this first analytical
arrive at real differential equations, which can always be done; and
which furnishes the solution, at least so far as to reduce it to pure
 The general object of the
Lagrange has established rules, which are simple, invariable, and


_ Among the greatest special advantages of the
isoperimetrical problems, is the important consideration of what
before him, though without them the greater part of the particular
 When the limits of the
is no occasion for noticing them.
limits, instead of being rigorously invariable, are only subjected to
required curve is to be traced are not fixed, and have only to remain
 Then it is necessary to pay attention to
relations which correspond to the equations of these lines or of these


_ This essential consideration is only the
relative to the variations of different independent variables.
variables are really independent of one another, as when we compare
two points, it will be the same with their variations, and,
to be separately equal to zero in the general equation which expresses
 But if, on the contrary, we suppose the
to take notice of the resulting relation between their variations, so
then decomposed is always equal to only the number of the variables
 It is thus, for example, that instead of
from among all possible ones, it may be proposed to find only what is
question the general solution of which forms certainly one of the most

_Questions of the second Class.
conditions are considered approach very nearly, in their nature, to the
characterized above as consisting in the investigation of _relative_
 There is, however, this essential difference between
integral which depends upon the function sought, while in the other it
 It is
constantly and necessarily more complicated than that of _absolute_
 Luckily, a very important general theory, discovered
Variations, gives a uniform and very simple means of making one of
 It consists in
minimum, a constant and indeterminate multiple of that one which, by the
seek, by the general method of Lagrange above indicated, the _absolute_
 It can be easily conceived,
the last integral must be equal to zero (because of the constant
integral, which disappears by virtue of the maximum or minimum state.
These two conditions evidently unite to produce, in that respect,

Such is a sketch of the general manner in which the method of variation
the _Theory of Isoperimeters_.
this summary exposition how much use has been made in this new analysis
noticed in the third chapter, namely, the generality of the
or mechanical phenomenon, in whatever body it may be considered.
this generality, indeed, are founded, by their nature, all the solutions
 If a single formula could not express
could not designate the time of the fall of a heavy body, according to
, how would it have been possible to
simultaneous consideration of all the cases which can be determined in


_ Notwithstanding the extreme
variations had at first no other object than the logical and general
incomplete idea of this beautiful analysis if we limited its destination
 In fact, the abstract conception of two distinct natures of
it was created, but also to all those which present, for any reason
 It
Analytique_," an extensive and important application of his calculus of
which are naturally presented by the questions of rational mechanics for
successive positions which are occupied, in virtue of its motion, by the
one point of the body to another in the same instant.
comparisons produces ordinary differentials; the other gives rise to
under a new point of view.
should conceive the Calculus of Variations, in order suitably to
most powerful that the human mind has as yet constructed.

transcendental analysis, I have no need of proving specially that it is
of view which the calculus of indirect functions, considered as a whole,
 Lagrange invented the Calculus of Variations in accordance
the general reconstruction of the transcendental analysis.
executed this important reformation, he easily showed how it could also
the proper development, according to his theory of derivative functions.
But the more that the use of the method of variations is difficult of
considered, the more necessary is it, in its application, to economize
analytical conception, namely, that of Leibnitz.
himself has constantly preferred it in the important use which he has
" In
geometers.


ITS RELATIONS TO THE ORDINARY CALCULUS.

In order to make as clear as possible the philosophical character of the
indicate a consideration which seems to me important, and by which I can
than Lagrange seems to me to have done.

  consideration, in a special work upon the _Calculus of Variations_,
  point of view, which I think adapted to extend its general range.

partial differences_, created by D'Alembert, as having introduced into
kinds of increments, distinct and independent of one another, which a
variable separately.
or any other magnitude which is referred to it, varies in two manners
according as we increase either the one or the other of the two
 Now such a consideration seems to me very
of the method of variations.
nothing but transfer to the independent variables themselves the
these variables; a modification which has remarkably enlarged its use.
think, therefore, that so far as regards merely the fundamental
having established a natural and necessary transition between the
derivation of which seems to be adapted to make the general notion more

According to the different considerations indicated in this chapter, the
which the analysis of indirect functions has yet attained.
primitive state, this last analysis presented itself as a powerful
phenomena, by introducing, for the expression of their laws, the
their relations are necessarily more simple and more easy to obtain than
 But the formation of these differential

point of view, may be regarded as essentially destined, by its nature,
the differential equations; for, in a great number of important and
equations, which, still more _indirect_ than the simple differential
also much more easy to form, and from which we may then, by invariable
new order of auxiliary infinitesimals which have been introduced, deduce
impossible to establish directly.
the most sublime part of that vast system of mathematical analysis,
by an uninterrupted succession of ideas, general methods more and more
presents the most incomparably imposing and unequivocal monument of the

We must, however, also admit that the conceptions which are habitually
indirect, more general, and especially more abstract than all others,
highest known degree of intellectual exertion, in order never to lose
reasonings which offer to the mind such uncertain resting-places, and in
 We must undoubtedly
geometers, with the exception of Lagrange, have as yet made of such an




THE CALCULUS OF FINITE DIFFERENCES.

The different fundamental considerations indicated in the five preceding
exposition of mathematical analysis, regarded in the philosophical point
 Nevertheless, in order not to neglect any truly important
very summarily explain the veritable character of a kind of calculus
ordinary analysis, is still regarded as being of an essentially distinct
 I refer to the _Calculus of Finite Differences_, which will be


_ This calculus, created by Taylor, in his
in the consideration of the finite increments which functions receive as
variables.
characteristic Δ, to distinguish them from _differentials_, or
functions, and become the subject of a second similar consideration, and
successive orders, analogous, at least in appearance, to the consecutive
 Such a calculus evidently presents, like the

 To determine the successive differences of all the various
definite manner of increase of the independent variables, which are

2°.
from any equations established between them, and go back to the

Hence follows the decomposition of this calculus into two distinct ones,
Calculus of Finite Differences_, the latter being also sometimes called
 Each of these would,
the fourth chapter for the differential and the integral calculus.

_Its true Nature.
conception he had founded a calculus of an entirely new nature,
calculus of Leibnitz, although resting on an analogous consideration.
is in this way, also, that almost all geometers have viewed the analysis
that these properties belonged much more to the forms and to the
 In
Leibnitz, and makes of it a truly distinct and superior calculus, is the
different nature from the primitive functions, so that they may give
admirable fundamental properties of the transcendental analysis, which
 But it is not so with the _differences_
functions essentially similar to those which have produced them, a
establishment of equations, and prevents their leading to more general
 Every equation of finite differences is truly, at bottom, an
states are compared.
illusion respecting the true character of these equations, disguises it,
made apparent by replacing the _differences_ by the equivalent
the abridged designations.
offered, and never can offer, in any question of geometry or of
necessarily from the analysis of Leibnitz.
clearly proven that the pretended analogy observed between the calculus
this way, that the formulas belonging to the former calculus can never
nature of which is essentially distinct.

differences is, in general, improperly classed with the transcendental
 I
to be only a very extensive and very important branch of ordinary
direct functions, the equations which it considers being always, in





of Taylor ought to be regarded as having constantly for its true object
been considered before that illustrious geometer.
have mentioned this important theory in treating, in the second chapter,
 But, in
only in the consideration of the calculus of finite differences, which,
logical study of questions relating to _series_.

according to any constant law, necessarily gives rise to these two

 The law of the series being supposed known, to find the expression
whatever without being obliged to form successively all the preceding

2°.
terms of the series by means of their places, so that it can be known

These two fundamental questions being considered to be resolved, it may
its general term, or the expression of the sum.
problems has so much the more extent and difficulty, as there can be
to the number of preceding terms on which each term directly depends,
 We may
in his "Analytical Theory of Probabilities," by the analysis to which he
really only a new and higher branch of the calculus of finite

These general views which I have indicated give only an imperfect idea
geometers have risen by means of this single consideration of series, so
 It necessarily
equations, considered in its whole extent; and it is, by its nature,
to conduct it to a complete solution.
must still be its extreme imperfection, in spite of the successive
 We do not, indeed,
simple questions of this nature.

_Its identity with this Calculus.
necessary and perfect identity, which has been already announced,
considered in all its bearings.
manner of Taylor evidently amounts to finding the _law_ of formation of
of its general term; in the same way, every analogous integration may be
term of which would be expressed by the proposed difference.
point of view, the various problems of the calculus of differences,
very great value, as treating of important questions relating to series.
But it is very doubtful if the form and the notation introduced by
of this kind.
and certainly more logical, to replace the _differences_ by the terms
 As the
and has nothing peculiar to it but its system of signs, there could
from ordinary analysis, of which it is, in reality, only an immense
 This consideration of _differences_, most generally useless,
character of an epoch in which, analytical ideas not being sufficiently
forms suitable for simple numerical comparisons.


PERIODIC OR DISCONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS.

However that may be, I must not finish this general appreciation of the
which it has given birth, and which has since acquired a great
 It is the consideration of those periodic or discontinuous
of the corresponding variables, subjected to a certain law, and which
differences in order to render them sufficiently general, as simple
their generality.
been the subject of extended investigation by M.
new and important applications of it in his mathematical theory of heat.


APPLICATIONS OF THIS CALCULUS.

_Series.
of the calculus of finite differences, it would be proper to place in
solution of questions relating to series; if, as has been shown, the
its nature, the actual foundation of the calculus of Taylor.

_Interpolations.
most essential of the veritable applications of the analysis of Taylor
frequently and so usefully employed in the investigation of the
 The question consists, as is well
numbers, subjected to the same law which we suppose to exist between the
 We can abundantly verify, in this principal application of the
consideration of _differences_ with respect to the questions which
 Indeed, Lagrange has replaced the formulas of
finite differences, by much simpler general formulas, which are now
making any use of the notion of _differences_, which only complicates


_ A last important class of applications
distinguished from the preceding, consists in the eminently useful
length and the area of any curve, and in the same way the cubature of a
 This procedure (which may besides be
as the question of interpolation) frequently offers a valuable
to integrations, which we do not yet know how to effect, or to

       *       *       *       *       *
Such are the various principal considerations to be noticed with respect
 This examination completes the


 In it
possible (supposing the general science of the calculus to be perfect),
the problems which can be presented by _Geometry_ and _Mechanics_, and
degree of precision and especially of unity; in a word, a character of
alone.


BOOK II.





GEOMETRY.


CHAPTER I.



_ After the general exposition of the philosophical
mathematics, given in the introductory chapter, it need not here be
natural science, only much more simple, and therefore much more perfect,
 This necessary perfection of geometry, obtained
eminently admits, is apt to produce erroneous views of the real nature
a purely logical science quite independent of observation.
nevertheless evident, to any one who examines with attention the
abstract geometry, that, although the facts which are considered in it
still there always exists, with respect to every body studied by
are not established by any reasoning, must be founded on observation

The scientific superiority of geometry arises from the phenomena which
all.
inquiries, as well as mechanical ones, but still farther, geometrical
should be considered as immovable.
general than mechanics.
for they are evidently independent of mechanical phenomena, while these
 The same relations hold

For these reasons, in our classification we have made geometry the first
to its own importance, serves as the indispensable basis of all the

Before considering directly the philosophical study of the different
obtain a clear and exact idea of the general destination of that
 Such is the object of this chapter.

_Definition.
improper manner, as being _the science of extension_.
this would be to say that geometry has for its object the _measurement_
although at bottom correct, and would be far from giving any idea of the

To do this, I think that I should first explain _two fundamental ideas_,
employment of metaphysical considerations.

_The Idea of Space.
 This conception
in the bodies themselves, we view it in an indefinite medium, which we
 This notion is
_impression_ which a body would leave in a fluid in which it had been
 It is clear, in fact, that, as regards its geometrical
without altering the reasonings respecting it.
of this indefinite _space_, we are spontaneously led to represent it to
live; so that if this medium was liquid instead of gaseous, our
 This
such a conception being only to make us view extension separately from
 We can easily understand in advance
geometrical phenomena in themselves, abstraction being made of all the
however, exerting any influence over them.
this general abstraction must be regarded as the first step which has
impossible if it had been necessary to consider, together with the form
 The
philosophical conception created by the human mind, has now become so
importance, by trying to appreciate the consequences which would result


_ The second preliminary geometrical
extension, designated by the words _volume_, _surface_, _line_, and even
[13]
  [Footnote 13: Lacroix has justly criticised the expression of
 It is
  certain portion of indefinite space, conceived as gaseous, we
  _surface_ are habitually, to our minds, just as _solid_ as a
 It may also be remarked that most generally, in order
  obliged to imagine the interior of the _volumes_ to be hollow,
  _solid_.

deprived of any one of the three fundamental dimensions, it is no less
utility, geometrical questions depend on only two dimensions, considered
separately from the two others.
motive, the study of extension with a single dimension, and afterwards
facilitating the study of complete bodies of three dimensions, the
 Such are the two
with regard to one or to two dimensions, as well as relatively to all

The general notions of _surface_ and of _line_ have been formed by the
manner, of extension in two directions, or in one only.
expressions habitually employed by geometers to define these notions
have no other object than to permit us to reason with facility
that which ought not to be taken into consideration.
sufficient to conceive the dimension which we wish to eliminate as
same, until it arrives at such a degree of tenuity that it can no longer
 It is thus that we naturally acquire the real idea of
by repeating for breadth what we had at first done for thickness.
Finally, if we again repeat the same operation, we arrive at the idea of
place, abstraction being made of all magnitude, and designed

_Surfaces_ evidently have, moreover, the general property of exactly
circumscribe _surfaces_ and are limited by _points_.
consideration, to which too much importance is often given, is only a

Surfaces and lines are, then, in reality, always conceived with three
a surface otherwise than as an extremely thin plate, and a line
 It is even plain that the
which he wishes to make abstraction is not constantly identical, for it
observations.
inconvenience, since it is sufficient, in order that the ideas of
destination, for each one to represent to himself the dimensions which
daily experience gives him occasion to appreciate.

metaphysicians upon the foundations of geometry.
remarked that these primordial ideas are habitually presented by
the notions of the different sorts of extent in an order absolutely the
serious inconveniences in elementary instruction.


THE FINAL OBJECT OF GEOMETRY.

These preliminaries being established, we can proceed directly to the
having for its final object the _measurement_ of extension.

founded on the distinction of the three kinds of extension, since the
surfaces and volumes as to lines.

_Nature of Geometrical Measurement.
in its direct and general mathematical acceptation, which signifies
homogeneous magnitudes, we must consider, in geometry, that the
conceived, even in the most simple and the most favourable cases, as
 The comparison of two lines is regarded as
always indirect.
the superposition of two surfaces, or, still more so, of two volumes, is
practicable, such a comparison is never either convenient or exact.
is, then, very necessary to explain wherein properly consists the truly


_ For this we must consider
number of lines, more or less easy to be assigned, the length of which
volume.
directly measured, proposes to deduce, from the simple determination of
surface, or to the unity of volume.
geometry, with respect to surfaces and to volumes, is properly to reduce
lines.

offers for the measurement of volumes and of surfaces, there results
manner, the general possibility of reducing to questions of lines all
to their magnitude.
geometrical expressions which determine surfaces and volumes in

It is true that direct comparisons between surfaces or between volumes
geometrical, but only as a supplement sometimes necessary, although too
rational methods.
body, and in certain cases its surface, by means of its weight.
same way, on other occasions, when we can substitute for the proposed
of the two volumes, by profiting by the property possessed by liquid
 But all means of this nature are

To render more sensible the difference between these modes of
very remarkable example; the manner in which Galileo determined the
 The
of such a problem.
by a direct experiment.
of the same material and of equal thickness, one of them having the form
weight of the latter always triple that of the former; whence he
circle, a result agreeing with the veritable solution subsequently
 Such a success evidently depends on the
necessary insufficiency of such expedients, even when they are actually

We see clearly, from what precedes, the nature of that part of geometry
 But the character
simplify the exposition, we have considered the measurement of lines as
 There is, therefore, needed a complementary


_ For this purpose, it is sufficient to
the first being alone regarded as direct, and that of the other as
 Although superposition is sometimes strictly
rational geometry must necessarily reject it, as not admitting of any
 The geometry of lines has, then,
curved lines to that of right lines; and consequently, in the most
questions relating to the magnitude of any curves whatever.
understand the possibility of such a transformation, we must remark,
of which must be sufficient to determine that of the curve.
circle, it is evident that from the length of the radius we must be able
ellipse depends on that of its two axes; the length of a cycloid upon
; and if, instead of
length of any arc, it will be sufficient to add to the different
the proposed arc, or the co-ordinates of its extremities.
the relation which exists between the length of a curved line and that
which relates to the study of lines.

respect to volumes and to surfaces, we may form a very clear idea of the
its general object, the final reduction of the comparisons of all kinds
lines, the only comparisons regarded as capable of being made directly,

character of geometry, and seems suited to show at a single glance its


_ In order to complete this fundamental
section relating to the right line, which seems at first incompatible
always be regarded as direct.

other objects which geometry considers.
estimation of a right line cannot be viewed as direct except so far as
 Now this often presents
reason, in the introductory chapter.
of the proposed right line depend on other analogous measurements
 There is, then, necessarily a
line; its object is to determine certain right lines from others by
assemblage.
imperceptible in viewing the whole of the science, is nevertheless
 It is evidently of especial
those of right lines, and if they could not be determined, the solution

Such, then, are the various fundamental parts of rational geometry,
being first considered, beginning with the right line; then the geometry





geometrical inquiries, the science must now be considered with respect

Thus considered, geometry is evidently susceptible, by its nature, of an
surfaces, or of volumes presents necessarily as many distinct questions
their number is evidently infinite.

figures which were directly furnished them by nature, or which were
combinations.
to constitute the science in the most philosophical manner, it was
 This abstract
different real figures which the exterior world could present.
then a fundamental principle in truly rational geometry to consider, as

The most superficial examination is enough to convince us that these


_ With respect to curved _lines_, regarding them as
plain that we shall have, in general, as many different curves as we
determined by an infinity of distinct conditions; although it may
have been already obtained.
so as to remain constantly at the same distance from a fixed point, it
distances from two fixed points which remains constant, the curve
product, we shall have an entirely different curve; if the point departs
_parabola_; if it revolves on a circle at the same time that this circle
along a straight line, while this line, fixed at one of its extremities,
are called _spirals_, which of themselves evidently present as many
these two motions of translation and of rotation, &c.
different curves may then furnish new ones, by the different general
evolutes, to epicycloids, to caustics, &c.
greater variety among curves of double curvature.

_Infinity of Surfaces.
more different still, considering them as generated by the motion of
 Indeed, the figure may then vary, not only in considering, as in
the generating line may be subjected, but also in supposing that this
analogous in curves, since the points which describe them cannot have
 Two classes of very different conditions may then
lines.
multiplicity of surfaces.
variety of the single group of surfaces which may be generated by a
surfaces, that of conical surfaces, the most general class of


_ With respect to _volumes_, there is no occasion
other only by the surfaces which bound them.

themselves furnish a new general means of conceiving new curves, since
surfaces.
regard as having been truly invented by geometers were obtained, since
 We know that the
studied by the ancients, were in their origin conceived only as
in different positions.
of these different general means for the formation of lines and of
forms in starting from only a very small number of figures directly


_ Finally, all the various direct
since rational geometry has assumed its final character in the hands of
 Indeed, as we shall see more fully in chapter iii.
invention of figures is now reduced to the invention of equations, so
by changing at will the functions introduced into the equations.
simple abstract procedure is, in this respect, infinitely more fruitful
powerful imagination, which should devote itself exclusively to that
 It also explains, in the most general and the most
which thus corresponds to the diversity of analytical functions.
it shows no less clearly that the different forms of surfaces must be
analytically by equations with two variables, while surfaces give rise
diversity.

rigorously infinite extent of each of the three general sections of





the nature of geometrical inquiries, it is now indispensable to return
new point of view, without which the complete science would be only very

When we assign as the object of geometry the _measurement_ of all sorts
reduction of all geometrical comparisons to simple comparisons of right
destination very precise and very easy to comprehend.
aside every definition, and examine the actual composition of the
definition as much too narrow; for it is certain that the greater part
all appear to have for their object the _measurement_ of extension.
spite of this fundamental objection, I will persist in retaining this
considering the different questions of geometry isolatedly, we endeavour
however important they may be, must be regarded as only secondary, we
of volumes, is the invariable object, sometimes _direct_, though most

This general proposition being fundamental, since it can alone give our
developments upon this subject.


PROPERTIES OF LINES AND SURFACES.

When we examine with attention the geometrical investigations which do
consist essentially in the study of the different _properties_ of each
modes of generation, or at least of definition, peculiar to each figure
 Now we can easily establish in the most general manner the
which the most complete knowledge of the properties of each form is an
 This is concurrently proven by two
nature.

NECESSITY OF THEIR STUDY: 1.
_ The
know any other characteristic property of each line or surface than that
it would be impossible to succeed in the solution of questions relating
 In fact, it is easy to understand that the
suitable for such an object, and that they even present the most
 Besides, since the primitive
in view, it is clear that we must not expect, in general, to find it the
is, of studying as far as is possible the _properties_ of the proposed
 Let us suppose, for example, that the circle is defined to be
"
find insurmountable difficulties in trying to deduce from such a
rectification or to the quadrature of this curve.
advance, that the property of having all its points equally distant from
nature, even though it be not precisely the most suitable.
manner, would Archimedes ever have been able to discover the quadrature
that it was the section of a cone with a circular base, by a plane
geometers, in transforming this first definition, were evidently


cubature or quadrature, the common definition of the sphere with that
a spherical body, as that one which, with the same area, contains the

No more examples are needed to show the necessity of knowing, so far as
order to facilitate the investigation of rectifications, of quadratures,
 We may
consists in employing in each case the property which is best adapted
 Thus, while we continue to
general destination of geometry, this first consideration, which goes to
in it the study, as thorough as possible, of the different generations


 _To pass from the Concrete to the Abstract.
of at least equal importance, consists in such a study being
abstract to the concrete in geometry.

admit of an exact definition, it necessarily results from this, as we
nature are always implicitly comprised in this abstract geometry,
 But when it is necessary to
fundamental difficulty, that of knowing to which of the different
lines or surfaces which we have to study.
establishing such a relation that it is particularly indispensable to
considered in geometry.

definition of a line or of a surface, supposing even that we could then
would generally be impossible), this knowledge would remain almost
know how to recognize that figure in nature when it presented itself
characteristic, according to which geometers had conceived it, should be
admit: a coincidence which would be purely fortuitous, and on which we
 It is, then,
each abstract figure, that we can be assured, in advance, of recognizing
rational labours, by verifying in each case the definition which is
 This definition is almost always
the same figure, with different circumstances; a double reason for its


_ The geometry of the heavens
to show the general necessity of such a study.
was discovered by Kepler to be the curve which the planets describe
 Now would this
possible, if geometers had been always confined to conceiving the
such definition, it is evident, would admit of such a verification.
most general property of the ellipse, that the sum of the distances from
undoubtedly much more susceptible, by its nature, of causing the curve
 The
is derived from the relation which exists in the ellipse between the
which admits of an astronomical interpretation, as expressing the law
elapsed since the beginning of its revolution.
that the purely speculative labours of the Greek geometers on the
generation under a multitude of different points of view, before Kepler
among all these different characteristics that one which could be most


_ Another example of the same order,
of the figure of the earth.
the sphere than its primitive character of having all its points equally
discover that the surface of the earth was spherical? For this, it was
properties capable of being verified by observations made upon the
length of the path traversed in the direction of any meridian of a
the horizon at each point.
series of preliminary speculations, is the subsequent proof that the
ellipsoid of revolution.

one besides may easily multiply.
extended knowledge of the different properties of each figure, the
accidental, and that the science would consequently want one of its most

Such, then, are two general considerations which fully demonstrate the
which have not the _measurement_ of extension for their direct object;
final destination of all geometrical science.
the philosophical advantages of the clearness and precision of this
manner, all known geometrical researches, in considering those which do
to prepare for the solution of the final questions, or to render

Having thus recognized, as a general principle, the close and necessary
those researches which constitute the final object of geometry, it is
means constrain themselves to keep such a connexion always in view.
Knowing, once for all, how important it is to vary as much as possible
without considering of what immediate use such or such a special
 They
to the continued establishment of that co-ordination.

more indispensable, since, by the very nature of the subject, this study
composes by far the greater part of the whole body of geometrical
 Indeed, the questions directly relating to rectifications,
in number for each figure considered.
the properties of the same figure presents an unlimited field to the
discoveries.
twenty centuries, with more or less activity undoubtedly, but without
from regarding that so simple subject as being exhausted; and it is
would not fail to find still unknown properties of those different
 If labours of this kind have slackened considerably for a
presently explained, because the philosophical revolution in geometry,
such researches.

of geometry necessarily infinite because of the variety of figures to
under the same figure may be regarded.
that which gives the broadest and most complete idea of the whole body
 We see that studies of this kind consist
geometrical phenomena which it can present, with a single fundamental





object of geometry, and shown how the science, thus defined, comprehends
necessarily to belong to it, there remains to be considered the _method_
 This discussion is
character of geometry.
most general consideration in this matter, developing and summing up

Geometrical questions may be treated according to _two methods_ so
the philosophical character of which does not seem to me to have yet
 The expressions of _Synthetical Geometry_ and
very false idea of them.
denominations of _Geometry of the Ancients_ and _Geometry of the
character to be misunderstood.
regular expressions of _Special Geometry_ and _General Geometry_, which
the two methods.

_Their fundamental Difference.
manner in which we conceive Geometry since Descartes, and the manner in
the use of the Calculus (or Algebra), as is commonly thought to be the
 On the one hand, it is certain that the use of the calculus was
continual and very extensive applications of the theory of proportions,
imperfect and especially extremely limited equivalent for our present
 The calculus may even be employed in a much more complete
solutions, which will still retain all the essential character of the
problems of geometry of two or of three dimensions, which are commonly
 On the other hand, important
solutions obtained without algebra may sometimes manifest the peculiar
analysis is generally indispensable.
method of Roberval for tangents, the nature of which is essentially
solutions, without any aid from the calculus.
instrument of deduction employed which is the principal distinction

The real fundamental difference, as yet imperfectly apprehended, seems
 In
perfection, must, as we have seen on the one hand, embrace all
each figure.
according to two essentially distinct plans; either, 1°, by grouping
to the same figure, and isolating those relating to different bodies,
by uniting under one point of view all similar inquiries, to whatever
to the really different properties of the same body.
whole body of geometry may be essentially arranged either with reference
 The
second, infinitely more rational, is that of the moderns since


_ Indeed, the principal characteristics of the
and the different surfaces, not passing to the examination of a new
interesting in the figures already known.
when they undertook the study of a new curve, the whole of the labour
assistance, otherwise than by the geometrical practice to which it had
 Whatever might be the real similarity of the questions
for the one could not at all dispense with taking up again the whole of
 Thus the progress of the mind was never
solution whatever, however analogous the proposed problem might be to
 Thus, for example, the
furnish any rational assistance for drawing the tangent to any other new
 In a word, the geometry of
essentially special.

_Geometry of the Moderns.
the contrary, eminently _general_, that is to say, relating to any
 It is easy to understand, in the first place, that all
to all imaginable figures.
problems--of rectifications, quadratures, and cubatures--which
 But this
the different _properties_ of lines and of surfaces, and of which the
the theory of curvatures, &c.
whatever.
particular figures have only an extremely secondary importance.
being understood, modern geometry consists essentially in abstracting,
question relating to the same geometrical phenomenon, in whatever bodies
 The application of the universal theories thus
treated of in each particular body, is now regarded as only a subaltern
which is certain in advance.
character as the numerical calculation of an analytical formula.
can be no other merit in it than that of presenting in each case the
the simplicity and elegance which the line or the surface considered can
 But no real importance is attached to any thing but the
figure whatever.
any real advance in science.
from the examination of the peculiarities of different figures, and
elevate itself to the consideration of new geometrical conceptions,
discovery of important properties which they had not before even
 Such is geometry, since the radical revolution produced by


_ The mere indication of the
sufficient to make apparent the immense necessary superiority of modern
 We may even say that, before the great conception of
bases, whether in its abstract or concrete relations.
regards science, considered speculatively, it is clear that, in
moderns before Descartes, and even for a little while afterwards, by
studied, the progress thus made, however rapid it might have been, would
in comparison with the general system of geometry, seeing the infinite
 On
moderns, the number of geometrical problems to be resolved is then, once

general methods, that the ancient geometers, in all their
ever having the certainty of obtaining, sooner or later, any solution
 Though this imperfection of the science was eminently suited
their progress extremely slow; we can form some idea of this by the
sections.
permits us, on the contrary, to make the greatest possible use of the
waste on very unimportant questions.

come to consider geometry in the concrete point of view.
already remarked that the relation of the abstract to the concrete in
investigations are made to bear directly upon all imaginable figures.
studying lines, only one by one, whatever may be the number, always
application of such theories to figures really existing in nature will
there is nothing to assure us that these figures can really be brought

Thus, for example, there is certainly something fortuitous in the happy
upon the conic sections and the determination of the true planetary
 In continuing geometrical researches upon the same plan, there
have been possible, in these special studies, that the researches of
incapable of any application, while they neglected others, susceptible
 It is clear, at
geometrical speculations.
geometry.
questions relating to any figures whatever, we have in advance the
could in no case escape the appropriate theory if the geometrical

From these different considerations, we see that the ancient system of
which did not begin to become completely rational till after the
 But it is evident, on
this _special_ manner.
and its necessity could not even have been felt, if a long series of
bases for the conception of Descartes, and rendered apparent the
philosophy.

_The Ancient the Base of the Modern.
must infer that, although the geometry which I have called _general_
which we shall chiefly confine ourselves, the other having no longer
to entirely dispense with _special_ geometry in a rational exposition of
 We undoubtedly need not borrow directly from ancient
nature of the subject, it is necessarily impossible entirely to dispense
basis of the science, dogmatically as well as historically.
of this is easy to understand.
essentially founded, as we shall soon establish, upon the employment of
considerations, such a manner of proceeding could not take possession of
 We know that the application of
whatever, since evidently it cannot be employed until the science has
phenomena considered, some _equations_ which can serve as starting
 These fundamental equations being
of consequences which it would have been previously impossible even to
respect to the generality of its conceptions and to the complete
 But mere mathematical analysis
even to demonstrate them anew when they have once been established.
Nothing can dispense with the direct study of the subject, pursued up to

We thus see that the geometry of the ancients will always have, by its
in the complete system of geometrical knowledge.
indispensable introduction to _general_ geometry.
it must be limited in a completely dogmatic exposition.
then, directly, in the following chapter, this _special_ or
order to occupy myself thenceforth only with the philosophical
truly rational, and which at present essentially composes the science.


CHAPTER II.



preliminary department in the dogmatical system of geometry, designed to
proper to begin with determining wherein strictly consists this
narrowest possible limits.


ITS PROPER EXTENT.

_Lines; Polygons; Polyhedrons.
view, it is easy to recognize that we might restrict it to the study of
_quadrature_ of rectilinear plane areas; and, lastly, to the _cubature_
 The elementary propositions
necessary starting point of all geometrical inquiries; they alone cannot
contrary, the complete theory of all other figures, even that of the
at the present day be completely comprehended in the domain of _general_
_equations_ which are sufficient to allow of the application of the
without this previous condition.

_elementary_ geometry more extent than would be rigorously necessary to
include in it the circle and the "round" bodies; the study of which
conic sections.
maintain this defect in method; but the best reason which can be given
would be in postponing, to so distant an epoch of mathematical
susceptible of a direct and continual application to a great number of
 In fact, to proceed in the most rational manner, we
relating to the length or the area of the circle, or to the quadrature
, which have been determined by the ancients from
 This inconvenience would be of little
mathematical science, and the advantage of proceeding in a perfectly
 But the
necessarily been retained in elementary geometry.
sections, the cycloid, &c.


_ While this preliminary portion of
is reduced by its nature to a very limited series of fundamental
polyhedrons, it is certain, on the other hand, that we cannot restrict
it has been recently attempted to present the establishment of the
view.
considerations of mathematical analysis, the constant relation which
fundamental proposition of the theory of similar triangles, that of
; in a word, precisely the only geometrical
subject, without the calculus being susceptible of having any part in
 Such aberrations are the unreflecting exaggerations of that natural
the influence of analysis in mathematical studies.
pretended analytical demonstrations of the parallelogram of forces are

The viciousness of such a manner of proceeding follows from the
 We have already, in fact, recognized
deduction, it would indicate a radically false idea of it to wish to
whatever; for on what would the analytical reasonings in such an
perfecting the philosophical character of a science, would constitute a
logical abstractions.

of the fundamental propositions of elementary geometry, we easily verify
 They are all founded on a vicious
idea of which was explained in the second chapter of the preceding book.
These demonstrations suppose that this principle does not allow us to
different concrete comparisons, which is evidently false, and contrary
 Thus it is easy to recognize
illegitimate acceptation, we could succeed in "demonstrating," with
at the first glance.
procedure by the aid of which it has been attempted to prove
triangle is constantly equal to two right angles, we see that it is
their angles respectively equal, the third angle of the one will
 This first point
very exact and simple manner.
this previous proposition has been attempted to be established, is of
from it, in reproducing it conversely, this palpable absurdity, that two
determination of the third side.
the demonstrations of this sort, the sophisms of which will be thus

The more reason that we have here to consider geometry as being at the
against this abusive exaggeration of mathematical analysis, according to
establishing upon pure algebraical abstractions the very foundations of


_ Another indication that
which is necessarily inherent in geometry, appears from their vain
the calculus, but by means of certain constructions, several fundamental
 Whatever may be effected, it will
direct observation in geometry as a means of establishing various
 While, in this science, the phenomena which are considered are,
one another than those relating to any other physical science, some must
serve as starting points.
perfection of the science is to reduce these to the smallest number
disappear.
extending, a little beyond what would be strictly necessary, the number
provided they are sufficiently simple, than in making them the subjects
demonstrations may be logically irreproachable.

to its least possible indispensable developments, having thus been
each of the principal parts of which it must be composed.
may here limit myself to considering the first and the most extensive of
line_; the two other sections, namely, the _quadrature of polygons_ and
capable of giving rise to any philosophical consideration of any
respect to the measure of areas and of volumes in general.


GEOMETRY OF THE RIGHT LINE.

The final question which we always have in view in the study of the
the different elements of any right-lined figure whatever; which enables
whatever circumstances it may be placed.
susceptible of two general solutions, the nature of which is quite
 The first, though
spontaneously derived from the direct study of the subject; the second,
afterwards, because it is founded upon the previous knowledge of the





figure, either with the same dimensions, or, more usually, with
 The first mode need merely be
to the mind, for it is evidently, by its nature, almost entirely
 The second is, on the contrary, susceptible of
 We still make an
represent with exactness the forms of bodies and their relative
magnitudes, when we do not need great precision.
consequence of the imperfection of their geometrical knowledge, employed
time the only one which they could apply, even in the most important
 It was thus, for example, that Aristarchus of
the earth, by making measurements on a triangle constructed as exactly
the three bodies at the instant when the moon is in quadrature, and when
sufficient to define the triangle.
the first to introduce calculated determinations into geometry, several
 The formation of trigonometry did not
diminished its use; the Greeks and the Arabians continued to employ it
calculus as indispensable.

cannot present any great theoretical difficulty when all the parts of
 But if we suppose, as most
then, a new order of geometrical considerations arise.
figure, which is constantly plane, not being capable, in that case, of
previously to fix with precision the mode of representation, which gives

It then remains to be determined according to what laws the geometrical
 This consideration generates a
properly to discover how we can replace constructions in relief by plane
 The ancients had to resolve several elementary questions
trigonometry, principally for different problems relating to the
 Such was the object of their _analemmas_, and of the
calculus.
what we now name _Descriptive Geometry_, although they did not conceive

I think it proper briefly to indicate in this place the true
essentially a science of application, it ought not to be included within





when we consider their graphical solution, to a common difficulty which
constructions in relief, which are necessary to resolve them directly,
plane constructions, by means of which we finally obtain the same
 Without this indispensable transformation, every solution of
practice, although theoretically the constructions in space are usually
 It was in order to furnish general
Geometry_ was created, and formed into a distinct and homogeneous
 He invented, in the first place, a
plane, by the aid of _projections_ on two different planes, usually
their common intersection so as to coincide with the other produced; in
regard points and lines as being determined by their projections, and
 This being
labours of this kind which had before been executed by a number of
manner, in what any questions of that nature must consist--found that
abstract problems, capable of being resolved separately, once for all,
others to the intersections of surfaces.
methods for the graphical solution of these two orders of problems
of the various arts of construction--stone-cutting, carpentry,
--can henceforth be treated as
of which will always necessarily lead to an exact solution, which may be
each case.


attention of those philosophers who consider all that the human species
one, towards that general renovation of human labours, which must
so necessary to their future progress.
inevitably commence with that class of industrial labours, which is
most perfect, and the most ancient.
though with less facility, to all other practical operations.
Monge himself, who conceived the true philosophy of the arts better than
mechanical arts.

very important not to deceive ourselves with respect to its true
saw in it a means of enlarging the general and abstract domain of
 The result has in no way answered to these mistaken
 And, indeed, is it not evident that descriptive geometry has no
true special theory of the geometrical arts? Considered in its abstract
geometrical speculations.
geometrical question should fall within the peculiar domain of
by speculative geometry, the solutions of which then, as we have seen,
place of constructions in relief by plane constructions; a substitution
geometry.

education, the study of descriptive geometry possesses an important
utility.
habituating the mind to consider very complicated geometrical
correspondence with the figures which are actually traced--of thus
important faculty of the human mind which is properly called
acceptation, in representing to ourselves, clearly and easily, a vast
us.

geometry by determining its logical character, we have to observe that,
solutions, on the other hand it approaches the geometry of the moderns
 These questions are in
preceding chapter, constitutes the true fundamental character of modern
figures whatever, the peculiarity of each having only a purely secondary
 The solutions of descriptive geometry are then graphical,
those of the moderns.


examination of _special_ geometry, always considered as reduced to its
_general_ geometry.
solution of the fundamental problem relating to the right line--that
figure by means of one another--and have now to examine in a special





dwelt upon, belongs necessarily, by the very nature of the question, to
employed causes it to be generally, but very improperly, separated from
 We have thus an opportunity of verifying, in a very important
it is not by the employment of the calculus that the modern geometry is
 The ancients are in
as rectilinear; it being only much less perfect in their hands, on
 It
thought, in those which we shall afterwards devote to the philosophical
character of this important preliminary theory, which is usually, though
is really only a complement of _elementary geometry_ properly so called.

evidently sufficient to know how to determine the different elements of
simple _trigonometry_.


TRIGONOMETRY.

The difficulty in resolving algebraically such a question as the above,
triangle, three distinct equations; which, when once obtained, will
analysis.

_How to introduce Angles.
equations in the most general manner, we immediately meet with a
angles into the calculation, according as they are made to enter
to them; or _indirectly_, by the chords of these arcs, which are hence
 Of these two systems of
adopted, as being the only practicable one, since the condition of
of the triangles and the trigonometrical lines which represent the
establish equations between the sides and the angles themselves.

_Advantages of introducing Trigonometrical Lines.
since the solution can be obtained by either system indifferently, that
persisted in following from choice the system primitively admitted from
equations to be obtained with much more facility, must, in like manner,
much more simple, since they then exist only between right lines,

relates to formulas which are eminently elementary, and destined to be
all its various applications.

reality, always given by itself, and not by its trigonometrical lines;
to be determined, and not that of any of its trigonometrical lines.
seems, according to this, that such lines are only useless
finally eliminated, and the introduction of which does not appear
 It is indeed important to
real utility of this manner of proceeding.

_Division of Trigonometry into two Parts.
the introduction of these auxiliary magnitudes divides the entire
which has for its object to pass from the angles to their
to determine the sides of the triangles by the trigonometrical lines of
 Now the first of these two fundamental
treated and reduced to numerical tables once for all, in considering all
upon the particular triangles in which they may enter in each case;
at least in its arithmetical relations, for each new triangle which it
 This is the reason why the first portion of the
taken into the account, being always done in advance; while, if such a
ourselves under the obligation of recommencing the entire calculation in
 Such is the essential property of the present
advantage, if it was necessary to calculate continually the
the intermediate agency introduced would then be more troublesome than

In order to clearly comprehend the true nature of this conception, it
to produce an analogous effect either in its algebraic, or, still more,
 In
in fact that its general result is to decompose all imaginable
 The first and most
all (since it depends only upon the numbers to be considered, and not at
enter), and consists in considering all numbers as assignable powers of
 The second part of the calculation, which must of
value determined, is thenceforth reduced to executing upon these
 I
can carry out for himself.

but all-important at its origin) of the trigonometrical system adopted,
their trigonometrical lines, or the converse, admits of an arithmetical
destination of trigonometry) without the previous resolution of the
 It is doubtless to such a peculiarity
 The
as tables of chords (which the ancients naturally took as the
different object, in the course of the labours of Archimedes on the
determination of a certain series of chords; so that when Hipparchus
completing that operation by suitable intercalations; which shows


_ To complete this
the extension of the same considerations which lead us to replace angles
equations, must also lead us to employ concurrently several
did the ancients), so as to perfect this system by choosing that one
 In
itself no ways limited; provided that they are determined by the arc,
they are derived from it, they are suitable to be substituted for it in
 The Arabians, and subsequently the moderns, in confining
five the number of _direct_ trigonometrical lines, which might be

But instead of recurring to geometrical formations, which would finally
new trigonometrical lines as the analytical transformations may require,
sufficiently general manner.
trigonometrical lines appropriate to each arc considered, but in
by all lines relating to an arc which is a very simple function of the
 It is thus, for example, that, in order to calculate an angle
its half, or of its double, &c.
trigonometrical lines is evidently much more fruitful than all the
 We may accordingly
present day by geometers is in reality unlimited, since at every
augment it by the method which I have just indicated.
however, have been given to those only of these _indirect_ lines which
sufficiently often to render such denominations necessary; a
of the system of trigonometry.

_Study of their Mutual Relations.
lines evidently gives rise to a third fundamental question in
different lines; since, without such a knowledge, we could not make use,
which, however, have no other destination.
the consideration just indicated, that this essential part of
susceptible of an indefinite extension when we view it in its entire
defined limits.

have to be studied in precisely the inverse order from that in which we
subject; for the third is evidently independent of the two others, and
triangles, properly so called--which must for that reason be treated in
consideration of their natural succession and logical relations to one

It is useless to consider here separately _spherical trigonometry_,
since, essential as it is by the importance and the multiplicity of its
of rectilinear trigonometry, which furnishes directly its fundamental
trihedral angle.

given in order to render apparent, by an important example, that
presented by what are apparently the most simple questions of elementary

       *       *       *       *       *
Having thus examined the peculiar character of _special_ geometry
geometry an indispensable preliminary basis, we have now to give all our
most rational manner.
examine the great original idea of Descartes, upon which it is entirely
 This will be the object of the following chapter.


CHAPTER III.



transformation of geometrical considerations into equivalent analytical
manner the beautiful conception by which Descartes has established in a
 Besides
science, or, rather, of establishing the whole of it on rational bases,
the greater interest in our eyes from its characterizing with perfect
of the abstract to the concrete in mathematics, by the analytical
 There is no conception, in the
attention.


ANALYTICAL REPRESENTATION OF FIGURES.

In order to succeed in expressing all imaginable geometrical phenomena
establish a general method for representing analytically the subjects
surfaces to be considered.
considered in a purely analytical point of view, we see how it is
_accidents_ of which it is susceptible.

analytical equations, we must previously surmount a fundamental
conceptions of geometry to simply numerical ideas; in a word, that of
considerations of _quality_.

_Reduction of Figure to Position.
the first place, that all geometrical ideas relate necessarily to these
_position_ of the extensions to be considered.
evidently no difficulty; it enters at once into the ideas of numbers.
With relation to the second, it must be remarked that it will always
 For the figure of a body evidently
composed, so that the idea of position necessarily comprehends that of
circumstance of position.
mind has proceeded in order to arrive at the analytical representation
positions.
that of referring ideas of situation to ideas of magnitude.
direct destination of the preliminary conception upon which Descartes

His philosophical labour, in this relation, has consisted simply in the
natural to the human mind, since it is performed spontaneously, so to
 Thus, when we have to
the method which we always adopt, and evidently the only one which can
known, by assigning the magnitude of the various geometrical elements,
 These elements
_co-ordinates_ of each point considered.
number, if it is known in advance in what plane the point is situated;
 As
position of a point, whether on a plane or in space, so many distinct
susceptible of being multiplied to infinity.
system adopted, we shall always have reduced the ideas of situation to
position of a point as produced by mere numerical variations in the


_ Considering at first only
that we usually determine the position of a point on a plane, by its
called _axes_, and which are commonly supposed to be perpendicular to
 This system is that most frequently adopted, because of its

distances from two fixed points; or, 2°, by its distance from a single
greater or less angle which it makes with a fixed right line, which
frequently used after the system first mentioned; or, 3°, by the angles
make with the right line which joins these last; or, 4°, by the

possible to deduce a certain system of co-ordinates more or less

A general observation, which it is important to make in this connexion,
point, in plane geometry, by the intersection of two lines, each of
single one of these conditions remaining variable, sometimes the one,
 We could not,
by the meeting of two lines.
_rectilinear co-ordinates_, properly so called, the point is determined
parallel to a fixed axis, at a greater or less distance from it; in the
circle, of variable radius and fixed centre, with a movable right line
point might be designated by the intersection of two circles, or of any
 In a word, to assign the value of one of the
equivalent to determining a certain line on which that point must be
 The geometers of antiquity had already made this essential
of which they made so happy a use to direct their researches in the
influence of each of the two conditions by which was defined each point

immediate motive of the labours of Descartes, which led him to create

After having clearly established this preliminary conception--by means
geometrical conceptions are capable of being reduced to simple numerical
generality, of the great original idea of Descartes, relative to the
the special object of this chapter.
first, for more facility, only geometry of two dimensions, which alone
the same point of view, the theory of surfaces and curves of double





_ In accordance with the manner of
easily established that, by whatever property any line may be defined,
equation between the two variable co-ordinates of the point which
analytical representation of the proposed line, every phenomenon of
equation.
course being in any manner determined, we shall evidently have to regard
entirely independent of one another.
is compelled to describe a certain line, we shall necessarily be
it can take, retain a certain permanent and precise relation to each
suitable equation; which will become the very clear and very rigorous
express an algebraical property belonging exclusively to the
 It is clear, indeed, that
determined except in giving at once its two co-ordinates, independently
a single co-ordinate is sufficient for completely fixing its position.
The second co-ordinate is then a determinate _function_ of the first;
of a nature corresponding to that of the line on which the point is
 In a word, each of the co-ordinates of a point
that the condition, on the part of a point, of having to belong to a
value of one of the two co-ordinates; which is found in that case to be
 The analytical relation which expresses
evidently be always conceived to exist, even in the cases in which our
 It is by this simple
manner--independently of the particular verifications on which this
definition of a line--the necessity of the analytical representation of


_ Taking up again the same reflections
necessity of the representation of every equation of two variables, in a
relation would be, in the absence of any other known property, a very
to fix the attention directly upon the general course of the solutions
most simple manner.
important fundamental advantages of analytical geometry, which has
analysis itself; not only by assigning to purely abstract researches a
more direct relation, by furnishing a new philosophical medium for
 In fact,
its solutions in the most precise manner, but in considering them only
obtained, except as the final result of a long and laborious series of
 On the other hand, the geometrical _locus_ of the
clearness the summing up of all these comparisons, permits it to be
have furnished it.
views, which we should have arrived at with much difficulty in any other
 It
curve, or of the curve _y_ = sin.
distinctly the general manner of the variations of logarithms with
could the most attentive study of a table of logarithms or of natural
 It is well known that this method has become entirely elementary
get a clear idea of the general character of the law which reigns in a


_ Returning to
we see that this representation is, by its nature, so faithful, that the
without causing a corresponding change in the equation.
exactitude even gives rise oftentimes to special difficulties; for
lines affect the equations, as well as their real variations in
in our analytical expressions, if geometers had not discovered an
 This
change analytically at will the position of a line with respect to the
situation of the axes themselves, which evidently amounts to the same;
transformation of the axes is produced, it becomes easy to discover
the same line differently situated, or refer to truly distinct
the other by suitably changing the axes or the other constants of the
 It must, moreover, be remarked on this
absolutely inevitable in analytical geometry; for, since the ideas of
reducible to numerical considerations, and the conceptions of figure
it is impossible for analysis to escape confounding, at first, the
directly expressed by the equations.

_Every Definition of a Line is an Equation.
philosophical explanation of the fundamental conception which serves as
new general consideration, which seems to me particularly well adapted
of lines by equations with two variables.
only, as we have shown, must every defined line necessarily give rise to
points, but, still farther, every definition of a line may be regarded
of co-ordinates.

logical distinction with respect to different kinds of definitions.
rigorously indispensable condition of every definition is that of
property which belongs to it exclusively.
attained in two very different ways; either by a definition which is
although truly exclusive, does not make known the mode of generation of
which characterizes the object by a property which expresses one of its
 For example, in considering the circle as the line,
evidently a definition of the first kind; while in choosing the property
a definition of the second kind.
principle, that even when any object whatever is known at first only by
susceptible of _explanatory_ definitions, which the farther study of the

This being premised, it is clear that the general observation above
an equation of that line in a certain system of co-ordinates, cannot
understood only of definitions which are truly _explanatory_.
considering only this class, the principle is easy to prove.
is evidently impossible to define the generation of a line without
translation or of rotation, into which the motion of the point which
 Now if we form the most
admit all possible systems, it is clear that such a relation will be
co-ordinates of a nature corresponding to that of the mode of generation
 Thus, for example, the common definition of the _circle_ may
curve, taking the centre of the circle for the pole.
the elementary definition of the _ellipse_ or of the _hyperbola_--as
the sum or the difference of its distances from two fixed points remains
equation _y_ + _x_ = _c_, taking for the system of co-ordinates that in
two fixed points, and choosing for these poles the two given foci.
like manner, the common definition of any _cycloid_ would furnish
co-ordinates of each point the arc which it marks upon a circle of
with a fixed line, and the rectilinear distance from that point of
 We can make
definitions of spirals, of epicycloids, &c.
that there exists a certain system of co-ordinates, in which we
merely writing algebraically the condition imposed by the mode of

Besides its direct importance as a means of rendering perfectly apparent
consideration seems to me to possess a true scientific utility, in
occurs in the actual establishment of these equations, and in
course to be pursued in inquiries of this kind, which, by their nature,
 In fact, since any
mode of generation, furnishes directly the equation of that line in a
equation, it follows that the difficulty which we often experience in
characteristic properties, a difficulty which is sometimes very great,
expressing this curve analytically by the aid of a designated system of

being all equally suitable; for various reasons, the most important of
almost always be referred, as far as is possible, to _rectilinear
 Now we see, from what precedes, that
reference to which the equation of the curve will be found to be
 The principal
consists, then, in general, in a certain transformation of co-ordinates.
It is undoubtedly true that this consideration does not subject the
success of which is always certain; which, from the very nature of the
light upon the course which it is proper to adopt, in order to arrive at
 Thus, after having in the first place formed the
which we are considering, it will be necessary, in order to obtain the
admitted, to endeavour to express in a function of these last
generation.
to give invariable and precise precepts.
have so many more resources in this matter as we shall know more of true
expression of a greater number of different algebraical phenomena.


CHOICE OF CO-ORDINATES.

In order to complete the philosophical exposition of the conception
the considerations relating to the choice of the system of co-ordinates
 They will give the rational
rectilinear system; a preference which has hitherto been rather the
the exact result of a direct and thorough analysis.

_Two different Points of View.
the different systems of co-ordinates, it is indispensable to
one another, which belong to analytical geometry; namely, the relation
equations; and, reciprocally, the relation of geometry to algebra,

It is evident that in every investigation of general geometry these two
since we have always to pass alternately, and at insensible intervals,
analytical to geometrical considerations.
temporarily separating them is none the less real; for the answer to the
presently, very far from being the same in both these relations, so that


 _Representation of Lines by Equations.
view_--the representation of lines by equations--the only reason which
the greater simplicity of the equation of each line, and greater
 Now it is easy to see that there does not
deserving in that respect a constant preference over all others.
fact, we have above remarked that for each geometrical definition
of the line is obtained at once, and is necessarily found to be also
nature of the characteristic property under consideration.
rectilinear system could not, therefore, be constantly the most
there is probably no system which, in certain particular cases, should


 _Representation of Equations by Lines.
however, under the _second point of view_.
establish, as a general principle, that the ordinary rectilinear system
of equations by the corresponding geometrical _loci_; that is to say,
it than in any other.

co-ordinates consists in determining a point by the intersection of two
_loci_ must be that in which these two lines are the simplest possible;

that name, that is to say, which employ only right lines to determine
fixed lines as co-ordinates; such, for example, would be that in which
lines, which go from that point to two fixed points, make with the right
not rigorously sufficient to explain the preference unanimously given to
 But in examining in a more thorough manner the nature
lines, whose meeting determines the point considered, must necessarily
a single variable condition, which gives rise to the corresponding
the system, taking this term in its most extended mathematical
 The variation is indispensable, in order that we may be
in order that there may exist means of comparison.
_rectilinear_ systems, each of the two right lines will be subjected to
condition.

_Superiority of rectilinear Co-ordinates.
is evident, as a general principle, that the most favourable system for
the variable condition of each right line shall be the simplest
necessary to attain that object.
determining two movable right lines, the easiest to follow geometrically
invariable, it only approaches or recedes, more or less, to or from a
 It would be, for example, evidently more difficult to
determined by the intersection of two right lines, which each turn
axis, as in the system of co-ordinates previously noticed.
true general explanation of the fundamental property possessed by the
geometrical representation of equations, inasmuch as it is that one in
resulting from the change in the value of its co-ordinates.
feel clearly all the force of this consideration, it would be sufficient
geometrical image, so simple and so easy to follow, of two right lines
replaced by the complicated picture of an infinite series of concentric
 It
importance to analytical geometry of a property so profoundly
and take a progressively increasing value in all labours of this kind.

_Perpendicularity of the Axes.
which demonstrates the superiority of the ordinary system of
may also take notice of the utility for this object of the common usage
rather than with any other inclination.
lines by equations, this secondary circumstance is no more universally
according to the particular occasion, any other inclination of the axes
 But, in the inverse point of
represent equations in a more simple and even more faithful manner; for,
longer have a perfect identity, it follows that, if the geometrical
will be presented, by reason merely of this inequality of the angles,
diversity, and will necessarily alter the rigorous exactness of the
algebraic comparisons.
_c_, which, by its perfect symmetry, should evidently give a curve
contrary, if we take axes not rectangular, by a geometric _locus_, the
 It is plain that the only means of
two axes to be a right angle.

system of rectilinear co-ordinates has no constant superiority over all
continually combined in analytical geometry, yet as, on the other hand,
aptitude for the representation of equations must cause it to generally
particular cases, that the necessity of simplifying equations and of
perfect system.
of which are ordinarily constructed the most essential theories of
geometrical phenomena.
other, the polar system is almost always the one which is fixed upon,
rectilinear system to cause the equations, which are too complicated
with respect to the other.
advantage of admitting of a more direct and natural concrete
questions to which the theory of circular movement gives rise, and in

       *       *       *       *       *
In order to simplify the exposition, we have thus far considered the
_plane curves_, the general study of which was the only object of the
 To complete this
idea was extended by Clairaut, about a century afterwards, to the
 The
myself on this subject to the rapid examination of what is strictly





_ The complete analytical
co-ordinates to be assigned; as, for example, in the system which is
plane geometry, distances from the point to three fixed planes, usually
intersection of three planes whose direction is invariable.
also employ the distances from the movable point to three fixed points,
common centre.
by giving its distance from a fixed point, and the direction of that
two invariable axes; this is the _polar_ system of geometry of three
sphere having a fixed centre, with two right cones with circular bases,
 In a word, there is
various possible systems of co-ordinates which we have already observed
 In general, we have to conceive a point
whatever, as it was in the former case by that of two lines: each of
determination constant, excepting one, which gives rise to the
to constrain the point to be situated upon that surface.

point are entirely independent of one another, that point can take
 But if the point is
whatever, then two co-ordinates are evidently sufficient for determining
place of the condition imposed by the third co-ordinate.
in this case, under the analytical point of view, necessarily conceive
latter remaining perfectly independent of each other.
a certain equation between the three variable co-ordinates, which will
the precise degree of indetermination in the position of the point.

_Expression of Surfaces by Equations.
to be discovered, but always possible, will be the analytical definition
that surface, and for them alone.
whatever, even a simple change of place, the equation must undergo a
 In a word, all
translated by certain equivalent analytical conditions appropriate to
interpretation of this general and necessary harmony will essentially


_ Considering next this fundamental
every equation of three variables may, in general, be represented
characteristic property, that the co-ordinates of all its points always
 This geometrical
system of co-ordinates which may serve for the construction of this
 In adopting, for example, the rectilinear system, it is
every particular value attributed to _z_ will give an equation between
situated in a plane parallel to the plane of _x_ and _y_, and at a
geometrical locus will present itself as composed of an infinite series
interruptions which may exist), and will consequently form a veritable
 It would be the same in considering any other system of
becomes more difficult to follow.

of Descartes, on which is founded general geometry relative to surfaces.
It would be useless to take up here directly the other considerations
one can easily extend to surfaces; whether to show that every definition
equation of that surface in a certain system of co-ordinates, or to
one which is generally the most convenient.
last point, that the necessary superiority of the ordinary rectilinear
marked in analytical geometry of three dimensions than in that of two,
result from the choice of any other system.
most striking manner by considering the polar system in particular,
surfaces as well as for plane curves, and for the same reasons.

conception relative to the analytical study of surfaces, a philosophical
importance, which Monge has introduced into the very elements of this
established according to the mode of generation, and expressed
containing arbitrary functions.


CURVES OF DOUBLE CURVATURE.

Let us now consider the last elementary point of view of analytical
representation of curves considered in space, in the most general
 In continuing to follow the principle which has been constantly
locus, corresponding to the degree of independence of the variables, it
situated upon some certain curve, a single co-ordinate is enough for
with the surface which results from this co-ordinate.
case, the two other co-ordinates of the point must be conceived as
 It
analytically, no longer by a single equation, but by the system of two
 It is
equations, considered separately, expresses a certain surface, their
determinate surfaces.
algebraic representation of a line in analytical geometry of three
 This conception is commonly considered in too restricted a
the system of its two _projections_ upon two of the co-ordinate planes;
the two equations of the line then contains only two of the three

intersection of two cylindrical surfaces parallel to two of the three
the ordinary rectilinear system, has the fault, if we strictly confine
representation of lines, since the combination of these two cylinders
equations of a line.
entire generality, it will be necessary in each case to choose, from
which might produce the proposed curve, that one which will lend itself
best known surfaces.
circle in space, it will evidently be preferable to consider it as the
other combination of surfaces which could equally produce it.

equations, in analytical geometry of three dimensions, produces, by its
confusion, consisting in this: that the same line may thus be expressed,
couples of equations, on account of the infinite number of couples of
difficulties in recognizing this line under all the algebraical
 But there exists a very simple method for
facilities which result from this variety of geometrical constructions.
It suffices, in fact, whatever may be the analytical system primitively
corresponding to a single couple of surfaces uniformly generated; as,
proposed line upon two of the co-ordinate planes; surfaces which will
obtained, and which will not vary except when that line itself shall
 Now, in choosing this fixed system, which is actually the most
equations those which correspond to them in this special construction,
equations, each containing only two of the variable co-ordinates, and
 Such is really
thus offers to us an invariable and certain means of recognizing the
sometimes very great.


IMPERFECTIONS OF ANALYTICAL GEOMETRY.

Having now considered the fundamental conception of analytical geometry
the sketch complete, to notice here the general imperfections yet
analysis.

adapted to represent only entire geometrical loci, and not at all
 It would, however, be necessary, in
or of a surface, or even a _discontinuous_ line or surface, composed of
the contour of a polygon, or the surface of a polyhedron.
especially, often gives rise to such considerations, to which our
 The labours of
 Fourier on discontinuous functions have, however, begun to fill up
improvement into the fundamental conception of Descartes.
manner of representing heterogeneous or partial figures, being founded
sines of an infinite series of multiple arcs, or on the use of certain
of which is unknown, presents as yet too much complication to admit of

_Relatively to analysis_, we must begin by observing that our inability
five, or more variables, analogous to those representations which all
imperfection of our system of analytical geometry, for it evidently
 Analysis being necessarily
it would be very unphilosophical to desire always to find among
which analysis can express.

must really be viewed as proceeding from the manner in which we conceive
 It consists in the evident incompleteness of our
lines or surfaces, inasmuch as in the construction of the geometric
at all noticing any _imaginary_ solutions.
last should, however, by its nature, be quite as susceptible as that of
 It follows from this
imperfect, and sometimes even so much so that there is no geometric
solutions.
distinguish between equations as different in themselves as these, for


We know, moreover, that this principal imperfection often brings with
secondary inconveniences, arising from several analytical modifications

       *       *       *       *       *
Our philosophical exposition of the fundamental conception of analytical
determining what is the general analytical expression of such or such a
reciprocally, in discovering the geometrical interpretation of such or
 A detailed examination of the most
in actually establishing this beautiful harmony, and in thus imprinting
perfect character of rationality and of simplicity.

_--The author devotes the two following chapters of his
     two and of three dimensions; but his subsequent publication of a
     render unnecessary the reproduction of these two chapters in the



Our knowledge of the stars is based on their _apparent_ attributes,
 The object of astronomy is
are their position in space, their movement, and their physical nature.

_radiation_.
different ways, according as the nature of the light is defined.
(Undulatory theory, Emission theory.

radiation as consisting of an emanation of small particles from the
 These particles are characterized by certain

particles, their mode of rotation, &c.
and electrical properties of the radiation are to be explained.
not here attempt any such explanation, but shall confine myself to the
deviating from the rectilinear path as they pass from one medium to
 This deviation depends in some way on one or more attributes of
 Let us suppose that it depends on a single attribute,
HUYGHENS, may be called the _wave-length_ (λ) of the particle.

place:--
(1) the total number of particles or the _intensity_ of the radiation;
(2) the _mean wave-length_ (λ_0) of the radiation, also called (or

 This characteristic of the
variation of the radiation with λ, and hence may also determine the mean

Moreover we may find from the radiation of a star its apparent place on

The intensity, the mean wave-length, and the dispersion of the
(_T_) of the star.
we find, indeed (compare L.
 41[1]) that the intensity is proportional
dispersion of the wave-length are both inversely proportional to _T_.
follows that with increasing temperature the mean wave-length
dispersion of the wave-length and also even the total length of the


 _The apparent position of a star_ is generally denoted by its right
 Taking into account the apparent
characterize the position of a star by its galactic longitude (_l_) and
 Before defining these coordinates, which
that we shall also generally give the coordinates α and δ of the stars
 We shall therefore use an abridged notation, so
7 and δ = +35°.


If δ is negative, for instance δ = -35°.



[Transcriber's Note: In this version of the text, the last two figures
]
This notation has been introduced by PICKERING for variable stars and is
is also well suited to all stars.
the characteristic _numero_ of the stars.
stars may in this manner obtain the same characteristic _numero_.
are, however, easily distinguishable from each other through other

The _galactic_ coordinates _l_ and _b_ are referred to the Milky Way
 The pole of the Milky Way has
 From the
 M.
14[2] found a somewhat different position.
that the real position of the galactic plane requires a greater number
employ the position used by PICKERING in the Harvard catalogues, namely


investigations at the Observatory of Lund and is also used in these

The galactic longitude (_l_) is reckoned from the ascending node of the
_Aquila_.
star from the Galaxy.
found a fairly detailed diagram from which the conversion of α and δ of
 All stars having an

Instead of giving the galactic longitude and latitude of a star we may
situated.
squares, all having the same surface.
northern pole of the Galaxy and are designated GA_1 and GA_2.
north of the galactic plane, between 0° and 30° galactic latitude, and
.
, GC_12.
of the galactic equator (the plane of the Galaxy) are called GD_1, GD_2,
.
, GD_12.
GF_2.
corresponding E-squares in the southern hemisphere.

represented in the projection of FLAMSTEED, which has the advantage of
arrangement necessary, or at least highly desirable, for all stellar
 It has also the advantage of affording a

The correspondence between squares and stellar constellations is seen
 Arranging the constellations according to their galactic
constellations:--
    Hercules, Cygnus, Cepheus, Cassiopæa, Auriga, Gemini, Canis Minor,


    Puppis, Carina, Circinus, Corona australis, Sagittarius,
mentioning only one constellation for each square.






 _Changes in the position of a star.
two or more occasions we obtain its apparent motion, also called the
 We may distinguish between a _secular_ part
 In both cases the motion may be
_parallactic_ motion, or it may be caused by a real motion of the star.
From the parallactic motion of the star it is possible to deduce its
 The periodic parallactic proper
the _annual parallax_ (π).
parallaxes of a star it is usually necessary for the star to be nearer
0″.
 More seldom we may in this manner obtain trustworthy values for a
02), or even still greater
 For such large distances the _secular_ parallax, which is caused
especially if the mean distance of a group of stars is simultaneously
 Such a value of the secular parallax is also called, by

When we speak of the proper motion of a star, without further


 Terrestrial distances are now, at least in scientific researches,
 A kilometre is, however, an
 When dealing with distances
always used the mean distance of the earth from the sun as universal
 Regarding the distances in the stellar system the
 German astronomers, SEELIGER
an annual parallax of 0″.
 To
great desideratum in science.
unit it may also be said that a distance is suitably to be defined
corresponds moreover, in this case, to the _harmonic_ mean distance of
 The same objection may
” proposed in 1912 by TURNER.

name and definition, nearly coincides with the proposition of SEELIGER,
 A _siriometer_ is
a parallax of 0″.
2).

time been employed.

79   light-years,
0633 siriometers.

5.
are too small for stellar wants.
distance, I have proposed for the stellar unit of time a _stellar year_
), corresponding to 10^6 years.
between the stellar and the planetary units of length and time, which
per stellar year is expressed with the same numerals in planetary units

Spectroscopic determinations of the velocities, through the
 per second.
relation with the stellar unit is the following:
    1 km.
 = 0.
/st.
               = 0.
    1 sir.
 = 4.
/sec.

/sec.
22 sir.
 (= 4.
earth distances from the sun per year).

to speak in the following.
that most stars have a velocity of the same degree as that of the sun
of a star amounts to 72 sir.
 (= 340 km.
).
give a table containing the most speedy stars.
stellar velocity is evidently equal to zero.

6.
_ This varies within wide limits.
faintest star which can give an impression on the photographic plates of
reflector) is nearly 100 million times fainter than Sirius, a star which
of apparent radiation.

 The reason is partly
numbers, if they were to be proportional to the intensity, and partly
proportional to _m_.

_law_, which says that changes of the apparent impression of light are
divided by the primitive intensity.
sensations.

great difference in the feeling, whereas an increase from one to two
 A match lighted in the day-time makes

A mathematical analysis shows that from the law of FECHNER it follows
.
.
progression (_I_, _I_^2, _I_^3, _I_^4, .
.
 It is with the sight the
 It is well known that the numbers of
geometrical progression though, for the ear, the intervals between the
 The magnitudes play the same rôle in
corresponding numbers.
intermediate between two other stars it is not the _difference_ but the

The branch of astronomy (or physics) which deals with intensities of
 In order to determine a certain scale
of the scale and the _scale-ratio_.

 The _zero-point_ is now almost
Harvard Observatory.
as far as I can see, has yet been given (compare however H.
 50[3]),
as a fundamental star of comparison for the brighter stars, and that,
 N.
4518 [1911]), the light of the Pole-star is very nearly invariable, we
a manner that for the Pole-star _m_ = 2.
 If the magnitudes are given
 S.
apply the zero-point correction.
catalogue, to -0m.

It is further necessary to determine the _scale-ratio_.
for the stars emanate from PTOLEMY.
scale-ratio--giving the ratio of the light-intensities of two
magnitudes, was approximately equal to 2½.
(with instruments for measuring the magnitudes) in the middle of last
5.
found more convenient to choose it equal to 2.
which number has the value 0.
 The magnitudes being themselves
value of the logarithm of the ratio of intensity than to use this ratio
 This scale-ratio is often called the POGSON-scale (used by
 Obs.
Radcliffe Observatory, 1856), and is now exclusively used.

which the light intensities are in the ratio 100:1 differ by exactly 5
 A star of the 6th magnitude is 100 times fainter than a star
16th magnitude a million times, and a star of the 21st magnitude 100
 The star
determined with an accuracy of 0m.
 Evidently, however,
1 in the magnitude a considerable
each other.
A consequence of the definition of _m_ is that we also have to do with
 Thus, for
58.
planets, as well as those of the moon and the sun, are also negative, as
“Die Photometrie der Gestirne” by G.

The apparent magnitude of the sun is given by ZÖLLNER (1864).
values are all found in Potsdam, and allude generally to the maximum

The brightest star is _Sirius_, which has the magnitude _m_ = -1.
 The
penetrating power of the instrument used.
HERSCHEL, used by him and his son in their star-gauges and other stellar
magnitude.
for visual observations.
is easily possible to get impressions of fainter stars, even with rather
 The large 100-inch mirror of the Wilson Observatory
apparent magnitude, and even fainter.

with the photometer of ZÖLLNER in a more or less improved form.

7.
_ The apparent magnitude of a star is changed as
increasing indirectly as the square of the distance of the star.
order to make the magnitudes of the stars comparable with each other it
distance.
 The corresponding magnitude
[4] We
absolute magnitude of the sun, according to ZÖLLNER's value of _m_,
4, of the moon to +31.
 For Jupiter we find _M_ = +24.
for Venus _M_ = +25.
 The other planets have approximately _M_ = +30.

been possible to carry out a determination, we find a value of _M_
 We shall give in the third chapter short tables of


 _Photographic magnitudes.
in the preceding paragraphs all refer to observations taken with the
 The total intensity of a star
the intensity.
plate, bolometer, a photo-electric cell, and other instruments.
difference in the results obtained with these instruments is due to the
account.

the violet parts of the spectrum, give us the _photographic_ magnitudes
 It is, however, to be remarked that these magnitudes may
of the plate (compare L.
 67).
sufficiently studied, seems however to be rather inconsiderable, and

The photographic magnitude of a star will in these lectures be denoted

In practical astronomy use is also made of plates which, as the result
acquired a distributive function nearly corresponding to that of the
 Such
A.
 36 [1912]).

measurements of the diameter of the star on the plate.
mathematical relation then permits us to determine _m′_.
a star image increases with the time of exposure.
in part to the diffraction of the telescope, to imperfect achromatism or
glass, and especially to variations in the refraction of the air, which

The _zero-point_ of the photographic magnitudes is so determined that
belong to the spectral type A0 and have _m_ = 6.
proposal of the international solar conference at Bonn, 1911.

carried out with great accuracy.
well summarised in the Report of the Council of the R.
 S.
1913.
proposed by SCHWARZSCHILD, called the half-grating method, by which two
exposures a certain grating is used that reduces the magnitudes by a


 _Colour of the stars.
different wave-lengths (λ).
therefore mention:--(1) the _total radiation_ or intensity (_I_), (2)
(σ).
of the stars as this is expressed through their magnitudes.
wave-length is pretty closely defined by the _colour_, whereas the

There are blue (B), white (W), yellow (Y) and red (R) stars, and
 The exact method is to define the colour through
as it is most usually called, or from the _colour-index_.
revert later to this question.
eye-estimates of the colour of the stars.

.
 2222
The signs + and - indicate intermediate shades of colour.

 MALMQUIST from the colour
between the colours of the stars and their spectra.

equator having an apparent magnitude brighter than 7m.

We find from these tables that there is a well-pronounced _regression_

type to be A0, but to A0 corresponds, upon an average, the colour
 The yellow stars belong in the mean to the K-type, but the
 The
because one of the attributes, the colour, is not strictly graduated
e.
[5] Using
find a fairly reliable value of the coefficient of correlation, and
85, a rather high value.

spectrum it is convenient to deal here with the question of the spectra


 _Spectra of the stars.
give a list of the wave-lengths of the FRAUENHOFER lines in the

The first column gives the FRAUENHOFER denomination of each line.
Moreover the hydrogen lines α, β, γ, δ, ε are denoted.
gives the name of the corresponding element, to which each line is to be
 The third column gives the wave-length expressed in

On plate III, where the classification of the stellar spectra according
of the principal H and He lines.

between the FRAUENHOFER lines A to H (λ = 760 to 400 μμ), whereas the
μμ).

classified according to their visual spectra.
introduced by SECCHI and was later more precisely defined by VOGEL.
three classes I, II, III of VOGEL correspond approximately to the colour
 Photography has now
that SECCHI's and VOGEL's definitions of the stellar spectra are no
 The terminology now used was introduced by PICKERING
describe the principal forms as they are defined in Part.

 It may be remarked that
,

that the B-stars may be hotter than those of type A.
the temperature-order of the spectra according to the opinion of the

_Type O_ (WOLF-RAYET stars).
of bright lines.
wave-lengths 463 μμ and 469 μμ, and the line at 501 μμ characteristic of

This type embraces mainly stars of relatively small apparent brightness.
The brightest is γ Velorum with _m_ = 2.
 We shall find that the
stars of type B.

Oa, Ob, Oc, Od and Oe.
intensities of the bright bands named above.
sub-types is for the present an open question.

of which PICKERING discovered a previously unknown series of helium
 They were at first attributed (by RYDBERG) to hydrogen and were

_Type B_ (Orion type, Helium stars).
 Besides
471, 493 μμ).

in Orion with the exception of Betelgeuze.
bright stars.


_Type A_ (Sirius type) is characterized by the great intensity of the
 The helium lines have vanished.
Other lines visible but faintly.


this type.
A-stars.

 The hydrogen lines still rather prominent but
 The two calcium lines H and K
9, 393.

Among the stars of this type are found a great many bright stars

_Type G_ (Sun type).
faint hydrogen lines.

stars.

_ The hydrogen lines still fainter.
maximum intensity (is not especially pronounced in the figure of plate

This is, next to the A-type, the most numerous type (1142 stars) among

We find here γ Andromedæ, β Aquilæ, Arcturus, α Cassiopeiæ, Pollux and

_Type M.
 The

Only 190 of the stars visible to the naked eye belong to this type.
Generally they are rather faint, but we here find Betelgeuze, α
period, which form a special sub-type _Md_, characterized by bright

Type M has two other sub-types Ma and Mb.

 Banded spectra.
compounds of carbon.

 The total number is 241.

type as Md.

above, but fill up the intervals between the types with sub-types which
.
.
 Thus the sub-types between A and F have the designations A0, A1,
.
, A9, F0, &c.
extreme types O and M.

11.
_ It may be gathered from the above description that
 Especially in
even at Harvard.
directly give _quantitative_ characteristics of the spectra.
less it is possible to substitute for the spectral classes a continuous
 Such a scale is

Let us use the term _spectral index_ (_s_) to define a number expressing
 Then we may conveniently define this
 Let A0 correspond to the spectral index
0, F0 to _s_ = +1.
0, K0 to _s_ = +3.
_s_ = +4.
0.
, have the
1, +0.
3, &c.
other intermediate sub-classes.
classes between B0 and M there corresponds a certain spectral index _s_.
The extreme types O and N are not here included.
may however be determined, as will be seen later.

for every spectral type, it is nevertheless not obvious that the series
attribute of the stars.
comparison with another attribute which may be rather markedly
 We shall discuss this point
 To obtain a well graduated scale of the spectra it
the spectral types, a change which, however, has not yet been


 We have found in §9 that the light-radiation of a star is described
the dispersion of the wave-length (σ_λ).
the spectral observations.
observations give, not the intensities at different wave-lengths but,
instruments employed--the eye or the photographic plate.
derivation of the true curve of intensity we must know the distributive
 M.
 As to the eye, we have reason to
mean wave-length of the visual curve of intensity nearly coincides with
DARWIN's principles of evolution, which demand that the human eye in the
wave-length of the visual intensity curve does coincide with that of the

 67).
intensity-curve than in the visual curve, for which, according to §10,
 We found indeed that the visual
sixth part of which interval, approximately, corresponds to the

In the case of the photographic intensity-curve the circumstances are
 The mean wave-length of the photographic curve is,
smaller than in the visual curve.

13.
according to the temperature of the radiating body and are therefore
 Here the mean
wave-length varies inversely as the temperature.
according to the law of STEPHAN, varies directly as the fourth power of
 Even the dispersion is dependent on the variation of
temperature of the star (L.
 41)--so that the mean wave-length, as
O and B than for the cooler ones (K and M types).
possible to determine the temperature of a star from a determination of
 Such
Potsdam, by ROSENBERG and others, though these researches still have to


 _Effective wave-length.
it is often called by the astronomers, the _effective_ wave-length, is
 On account of the refraction
really a spectrum.
image, the position of which is determined precisely by the mean
 This method is especially used with a so-called
stretched parallel to each other at equal intervals.
diffraction of the light we now get in the focal plane of the objective,
the place where it would have arisen without grating, but also at both
central star are certain theoretically known multiples of the effective
 In this simple manner it is possible to determine the
the spectral-index, the latter can also be found.
proposed by HERTZSPRUNG and has been extensively used by BERGSTRAND,


 _Colour-index.
may be identified with the mean wave-length (λ_0).
closely connected with the spectral index (_s_), we may use the spectral
 Instead of _s_ there may also be used
 This
following way.

such a manner that the visual magnitude _m_ and the photographic
0 (A0).
photographic magnitudes are then unequivocally determined.
that their values systematically differ from the visual magnitudes, so
visual, and the contrary for the other types.
for the M-type (still greater for the N-stars, though here for the
to nearly two magnitudes.
photographic plate than when observed with the eye.

called the colour-index (_c_).
the spectral-index is found to be rather high (_r_ = +0.
 In L.

corresponding to a given colour-index, and inversely.


_GIVING THE MEAN COLOUR-INDEX CORRESPONDING TO A GIVEN SPECTRAL TYPE OR

_GIVING THE MEAN SPECTRAL INDEX CORRESPONDING TO A GIVEN COLOUR-INDEX.

| Colour-index   |      Spectral     |


their photographic magnitude through adding the colour-index.
be considered as known (taking into account the high coefficient of
the star.
photographic magnitude brighter than 6.
the number of stars visually brighter than this magnitude.
indeed, 4701 stars for which _m_ < 6.
0.

16.
_ From the values of α and δ at
stars perpendicular to the line of sight.
the radial direction, is found by the DOPPLER principle, through
displacement being towards the red or the violet according as the star

The velocity _W_ will be expressed in siriometers per stellar year
/st.
/sec.
these units is given in §5.

17.
stars we find them referred to the following principal groups:--
I.
longitude (_l_) and latitude (_b_).
coordinates (α and δ) are given in an abridged notation (αδ), where the
last two numbers give the declination in degrees, the latter being

Eventually the position is given in galactic squares, as defined in §2.

 _The apparent motion of the stars_ will be given in radial
/st.
the line of sight.
(_u_0_) parallel to the galactic plane, and one component (_v_0_)
 If the distance (_r_) is known we are able to
perpendicular to the line of sight (_U_ and _V_).

 _The intensity of the light_ of the stars is expressed in
 We may distinguish between the _apparent_ magnitude (_m_)
of the apparent magnitude supposing the star to be situated at a

The apparent magnitude may be either the _photographic_ magnitude
(_m_) obtained with the eye.

(_c_ = _m′_-_m_).

 _The characteristics of the stellar radiation_ are the mean
 _The mean
wave-length) or found from the spectral type (spectral index) or from

There are in all eight attributes of the stars which may be found from
distance (_r_), proper motion (_u_0_ and _v_0_), radial velocity (_W_),
type (_Sp_) or spectral index (_s_), and colour-index (_c_).
the colour-index, the spectral type, the absolute magnitude and also (to
of the place of the observer and may therefore be considered not as only

Between three of these attributes (_m_, _M_ and _r_) a mathematical
have been found from observations.





SOURCES OF OUR PRESENT KNOWLEDGE OF THE STARS.

18.
which the most complete information on the attributes of the stars may
publications.
these researches.
relating to the position of the stars, their motion, magnitude, and


 _Place of the stars.
_ The most complete data on
“Durchmusterungs”.
the whole sky, one--visual--performed in Bonn and called the _Bonner
 D.
Cape Photographic Durchmusterung_ (C.
 D.
 As the first of these
source for the study of the sky and is moreover the first enterprise of
contents, as related by ARGELANDER in the introduction to the B.

B.
 was planned and performed by the Swedish-Finn ARGELANDER (born in
 A scholar of BESSEL he was first called as director in Åbo,
years 1852 to 1856 he performed this great _Durchmusterung_.
instrument he used a FRAUENHOFER comet-seeker with an aperture of 76 mm,
 The field of

In the focus of the objective was a semicircular piece of thin glass,
of declination.
narrow dark line perceptible at star illumination.
diameter (the “hour-line”) were 10 lines, at each side of a middle line,
 These lines were drawn with black oil colour

The observations are performed by the observer A and his assistant B.
is in a dark room, lies on a chair having the eye at the ocular and can
 The assistant sits in the room

From the beginning of the observations the declination circle is fixed
 All stars passing the field at

 When a star passes the “hour line” the
the clock.


The first observation was made on Febr.
1859.
 The

The catalogue was published by ARGELANDER in three parts in the years
south of the equator brighter than 9m.
ARGELANDER (his aim was to register all stars up to the 9th magnitude).
To this scale we return later.
with the declination-degrees, and for each degree according to the right
 Quotations from B.
 have the form B.
 23°.
signifies: Zone +23°, star No.

ARGELANDER's work was continued for stars between δ = -2° and δ = -23°
instrument (aperture 159 mm, focal length 1930 mm, magnifying power 26
 The observations were made in the years 1876 to 1881 and include
[8]
The positions in B.
 are given in tenths of a second in right


 _The Cape Photographic Durchmusterung_[9] (C.
 D.
 This embraces
 Planned by GILL, the
with 15 cm.
 Plates of 30 × 30 cm.
give the coordinates for a surface of 5 × 5 square degrees.
photographs were taken in the years 1885 to 1890.
the plates were made by KAPTEYN in Groningen with a “parallactic”
permits of the direct obtaining of the right ascension and the
 The measurements were made in the years 1886
 The catalogue was published in three parts in the years 1896 to

The positions have the same accuracy as in B.
 The whole number of
 KAPTEYN considers the catalogue complete to at least
2.

 D.
 P.
 we have all stars
0 (visually) and a good way below
 Probably as far as to 10m.

Cordoba in Argentina.
and is for the present completed up to 62° southern declination.

smaller extent and of great precision.
here speak (Compare, however, §23).

magnitude, has for the last thirty years been in progress at different
 The observations
work finished in an appreciable time.

21.
_ For the present we possess two great photographic
 M.
the _FRANKLIN-ADAMS Charts_ (F.
 C.

The _FRANKLIN-ADAMS Charts_ were made by an amateur astronomer
partly in Cape and Johannesburg, Transvaal, in the years 1905-1912.
photographs were taken with a _Taylor_ lens with 25 cm.
focal-length of 114 cm.
× 15 square degrees.

 Each plate was
the 17th magnitude.
Greenwich.
Observatory possesses one.
magnitudes and gives a splendid survey of the whole sky more complete,
observation of the heavens with any telescope at present accessible in

The F.
 C.
Observatory, so that thus a complete count of the number of stars for
 We shall

A great star map is planned in connection with the Paris catalogue
 This _Carte du Ciel_ (C.
 C.
still unfinished, but there seems to be a possibility that we shall one
 It will embrace stars down to
 A.
, but
gives better images than F.
 C.
in the future, especially for the study of the proper motions of the


 _Distance of the stars.
parallax, of the distances of the stars is very precarious if the
 (π = 0″.
catalogues of star-distances should be but few in number.
complete catalogues are those of BIGOURDAN in the Bulletin astronomique

British Astronomical Association XXVII” (1917), embracing 625 stars.
Through the spectroscopic method of ADAMS it will be possible to enlarge
the spectrum is well known, may be determined with fair accuracy.
has up to now published 1646 parallax stars.

23.
_ An excellent catalogue of the proper motions of
(1910) (B.
 C.
 It contains the proper motions of all stars down to
stars.
to a greater catalogue, which is to embrace some 25000 stars and is now


 _Visual magnitudes.
direction of PICKERING, made its principal aim to study the
same time the history of the treatment of this problem.
the genuine American manner, is not satisfied with the three thirds of
daughter observatory in South America, at Arequipa in Peru.
therefore possible for him to publish catalogues embracing the whole
 The last complete catalogue (1908) of the
Observatory T.
 50).
as complete to the magnitude 6m.
 To this catalogue are generally
Lund, and which are treated in these lectures.

catalogue of visual magnitudes is the “Potsdam General Catalogue” (P.

) by MÜLLER and KEMPF, which was published simultaneously with H.

northern hemisphere brighter than 7m.
 D.
 We have
 50 and P.
 C.
different and that the magnitudes in P.
 C.
-0m.
 The difference
of the stars, as has been shown by Messrs.


 _Photographic magnitudes.
rather incomplete.
“Actinometrie” by SCHWARZSCHILD (1912), containing the photographic
 D.
5 between the
 In all, 3522 stars.
magnitudes are however not reduced for the zero-point (compare §6).

to the pole in PARKHURST's “Yerkes actinometry” (1912),[11] which
 D.
5 between the pole and 73°
 The total number of stars is 672.

have produced a collection of “standard photographic magnitudes” for
 These stars, which are called the _polar sequence_,[12] all
 The list is extended
 Moreover similar standard photographic
 A.

A discussion of the _colour-index_ (_i.
_, the difference between the
 M.

photographic magnitude may be obtained, with a generally sufficient
above.

26.
_ Here too we find the Harvard Observatory to be
 The same volume of the Annals of the Harvard
 50) that contains the most complete catalogue of visual
included, _i.
_, for all stars to 6m.
 Miss CANNON, at the Harvard
 Not
embracing more than 200000 stars.
are now published and contain the first twelve hours of right
[13]

 _Radial velocity.
leading nation, though, this time, it is not the Harvard or the Mount
 The
 W.
degree developed the accuracy in the determination of radial velocities
 The
 229 (1913) of the Lick Observatory contains the radial
 At the observatory of Lund, where as far as
GYLLENBERG has made a catalogue of this kind for the radial velocities.
The total number of stars in this catalogue now amounts to 1640.

28.
special questions regarding the stellar system.

“Vierteljahrschrift der astronomischen Gesellschaft” a catalogue of all

always up to date.
given in “Geschichte und Literatur des Lichtwechsels der bis Ende 1915
Elemente ihres Lichtwechsels” von G.
 HARTWIG.
1918, 1920.
discussed in the first chapter are well known for one star is very
 These cases refer
brilliancy or by a great proper motion.
stars are better known than others is that they lie rather near our
 Before passing on to consider the stars from more general
make ourselves familiar with these well-known stars, strongly
carefully avoiding any generalization from the attributes we shall here


 _The apparently brightest stars.
well known to every lover of the stellar sky.
contains all stars the apparent visual magnitude of which is brighter
5.

third the equatorial designation (αδ).
first four figures give the hour and minutes in right ascension, the
 The
galactic longitude and latitude.
annual parallax and the corresponding distance expressed in siriometers.
The ninth column gives the proper motion (μ), the tenth the radial
/st.
/sec.
4.
 The eleventh column gives the apparent visual magnitude, the
help of _r_.
last column the photographic magnitude (_m′_).
_m′_ and _m_ gives the colour-index (_c_).


The values of (αδ), _m_, _Sp_ are taken from H.
 The values of _l_,
Lund Observatory, or from the original to plate I at the end, allowing
 The
mentioned in the previous chapter.

 C.
Lund already described.

brighter than 1m.
 The brightest of them is _Sirius_, which, owing to
 It
0.
06).
is -1m.
 Its
3, _i.
_, fainter than the apparent
smaller than one siriometer.
that _r_ = 0.
 The proper motion of Sirius is 1″.
is rather large but still not among the largest proper motions as will
 From the 11th column we find that Sirius is moving
6 sir.
 (= 7.
/sec.
small velocity.
40m and its declination -16°.
galactic coordinates are seen in the 5th and 6th columns.

 If we
2) in the 12th
than Sirius itself.
according to §6, amounts to -11.
placed at a distance from us equal to that of Sirius (_r_ = 0.
),
moon.
have thought Canopus to be actually the central star in the whole
 We find, however, from column 8 that its supposed
 We have already pointed out that
, when computed from annual parallaxes,
 As the value of _M_
based on this value to be very vague.
great value for the real luminosity of this star is found from its type
will be seen, is seldom found among giant stars.
large distance could on the other hand be found from the small proper
 Sirius and Canopus are the only stars in the sky

Space will not permit us to go through this list star for star.
be satisfied with some general remarks.

 We call to mind that all
probability _a priori_ of finding a star in one of the squares as in
 The squares GC and GD lie along the galactic equator (the Milky
 We find now from column 4 that of the 20 stars here considered
outside, instead of 10 in the galactic squares and 10 outside, as would
 The number of objects is, indeed, too small to allow
shall find in the following many similar instances regarding objects
the galactic poles.
conclude from such a partition that we then have to do with objects
distributed on the sky lie relatively near us.
that this conclusion is a consequence of the supposition, confirmed by
along the Milky Way than in the direction of its poles.

here under consideration, we should hence have reason to believe that
 In other words we should
their proximity but because of their large intrinsic luminosity.
8 really tends in this direction.
this case colossal, but they are nevertheless sufficient to show, in
 The
5 sir.
Sirius, Procyon and Altair lie at a distance smaller than one
 Of the other stars there are two that lie as far as 30
 These are the two giants Canopus and Rigel.
Even if, as has already been said, the distances of these stars may be
large.

from column 12, that their absolute luminosity is rather large.
absolute magnitude is, indeed, -2m.
 We shall find that only the
value of the absolute magnitude.

0″.
 We shall, indeed,
scarcely amounts to a tenth part of this value.
find from the table that the high value of this mean is chiefly due to
namely Sirius, Arcturus, α Centauri and Procyon.
proper motion smaller than 1″ per year and for half the number of stars
05, indicating their

That the absolute velocity of these stars is, indeed, rather small may
amounts to only three siriometers per stellar year.
below of the radial velocities of the stars we shall find that this is a
 This fact is intimately bound up with the general
large masses generally have a small velocity.
velocities fresh evidence, independent of the distance, that these

We find all the principal spectral types represented among the bright
 To the helium stars (B) belong Rigel, Achernar, β Centauri,
 To the Sirius type (A) belong Sirius, Vega,
 To the Calcium type (F) Canopus and
 To the sun type (G) Capella and α Centauri.
belong Arcturus, Aldebaran and Pollux and to the M-type the two red
 Using the spectral indices as an
of these stars is +1.


 _Stars with the greatest proper motion.
the stars having a proper motion greater than 3″ per year.
designations are the same as in the preceding table, except that the

In the astronomical literature of the last century we find the star 1830
motion.
 P.
 5h.
discovered in the year 1897 by KAPTEYN and INNES on the plates taken for
discovered 1916.
proper motion now known, is very faint, being only of the 10th
40 sir.
hence, as will be found from table 5 the third nearest star for which we
 Its linear velocity is also very great, as we find
/st.
/sec.
direction towards the sun.
7
known.
different reasons favour the belief that it is precisely the M-type that
 Its apparent velocity (_i.
_, the
much as 6 times the diameter of the moon.
its nearest neighbours in the table, observations differing only by a
proper motion, for which in other cases many tens of years are

Regarding the distribution of these stars in the sky we find that,
Way.
12 in the other squares.
irregularity in the distribution, but supported by the general thesis of
relatively near us.
less than eleven of these stars lie within one siriometer from our sun.
Their mean distance is 0.

That the great proper motion does not depend alone on the proximity of
 For
but the others have, with few exceptions, a rather great velocity
/st.
/sec.
taken to the sign, a value nearly five times as great as the absolute
 As this is only the component along the line of
the component velocity multiplied by √2.
proper motions depend partly on the proximity, partly on the great
 That both these attributes here really

The apparent and the absolute magnitudes are for these stars nearly
 This is a consequence
siriometer, at which distance _m_ and _M_, indeed, do coincide.
that these stars have a small luminosity and may be considered as
 According to the general law of statistical mechanics
velocity, as we have, indeed, already found from the observed radial

As to the spectral type, the stars with great proper motions are all
 The mean spectral index is +2.
the type G8.
table
    _Type_    _Number_       _Mean value of M_
3
5
6
We conclude that, at least for these stars, the mean value of the
 This conclusion,


 _Stars with the greatest radial velocities.
nebulae for which very large values of the radial velocities have been
 With these we shall not for the present deal, but shall confine
 The greatest radial velocity hitherto found is
constellation Perseus, which retires from us with a velocity of 72
/st.
/sec.
(010361) which approaches us with approximately the same velocity.
following table contains all stars with a radial velocity greater than
/st.
8 km.
).
mentioned above.

equator squares and 7 outside.
to be a galactic phenomenon and to be correlated to a great distance
 Of the 18 stars in consideration there is only one at a
siriometers.
with C.
 D.
243, which was the “second” star with great proper
 These stars have simultaneously the greatest proper motion and
 Generally we find from column 9 that these
 The
34, a very high value.

 The
1.
mean apparent magnitude is 7.
 As to the absolute magnitude (_M_) we
proper motions in table 3, have a rather great _positive_ magnitude and
considered as dwarf stars.
0.

yellow or red types (G, K, M), but there are 6 F-stars and, curiously
 After the designation of their type (A2 and A3) is
respect differs from the usual appearance of the spectrum of this type.
In the present case the peculiarity consists in the fact that a line of
1, which emanates from magnesium and which we may
spectrum of these stars, though the spectrum has otherwise the same
 There is reason to
(low temperature) in these stars (compare ADAMS).

 _The nearest stars.
the nearest of all stars.
75, corresponding to a
27 siriometers (= 4.
 This distance is
moreover confirmed in another way (from the study of the orbit of the
 In the year 1916 INNES discovered at the
magnitude, which seems to follow α Centauri in its path in the heavens,
somewhat nearer.
whether _Proxima Centauri_--as the star is called by INNES--or α
 Then comes BARNARD's star (175204),
 As No.
Sirius, as No.
 21 Altair.
magnitude or fainter.
 10--61 Cygni--is especially interesting, being
endeavours in vain, have succeeded in determining the distance with the

From column 4 we find that the distribution of these stars on the sky is
 All these stars have a
42 per year.
priori to be expected from their great proximity.
is, numerically, greater than could have been supposed.
probably associated with the generally small mass of these stars.

3.
near stars is Sirius (_m_ = -1.
11).
that no bright stars exist at a distance smaller than one siriometer,
 The
_near_ stars--all stars within one siriometer from us with an apparent
also all near stars brighter than 7m (10 stars), or even all brighter
limit).
systematic investigations of the annual parallax have been made and
the siriometer sphere in the neighbourhood of the sun.
the total number of stars within this sphere is one of the fundamental
immediately.

in table? Evidently they must principally be faint stars.
further and answer that _all stars with an absolute magnitude brighter
 For if _M_ is equal to 6 or
siriometer.
6m are known and are contained in the list.
_absolutely_ brighter than 6m must be found in table 5.
the number of stars having an absolute magnitude brighter than 6m

If, finally, the spectral type of the near stars is considered, we find
the following way:--
    Spectral type   B A F G K M

For two of the stars the spectrum is for the present unknown.

 The
the red types.

we may proceed in different ways.
to which I refer the reader, has used the proper motions as a scale of
this sphere, confining ourselves to stars apparently brighter than the
5.
 sir.

 A very rough method which,
 Let us suppose
1000 siriometers and in the direction of the poles of the Milky Way an
 We have later to return to the fuller discussion of
 For the present it is sufficient to assume these values.
The whole system of the Galaxy then has a volume of 200 million cubic
 Suppose further that the total number of stars in the
return in a following chapter.
of stars per cubic siriometer would amount to 5.
density of the stars in each part of the Galaxy is the same.
lies rather near the centre of the system, where the density is
 A calculation, which
density in the centre amounts to approximately 16 times the average
the sun (and of the centre).
has a volume of 4 cubic siriometers, so that we obtain in this way 320
 For
than too small, and we may perhaps estimate the total number to be
astronomers.

the number of stars of different apparent or absolute magnitudes.
latter way is the most simple.
the absolute magnitudes which are now known differ between -8 and +13.
But from mathematical statistics it is proved that the total range of a
dispersion of the series.
the absolute magnitudes of the stars has approximately the value 3 (we
5, but for large numbers of

As, further, the number of stars per cubic siriometer with an absolute
cubic siriometer brighter than 6m), we get a relation between the total
magnitude (_M_0_) of the stars, so that _D_0_ can be obtained, as soon
 The computation of _M_0_ is rather difficult, and is
 Supposing, for the moment, _M_0_ = 10
within a distance of one siriometer from the sun.
fifth part of these stars.

34.
_ In §22 I have paid attention to the now available
 The most extensive of
625 stars.
measured must however be considered as rather uncertain, and I have
0″.
parallax be considered as reliable, as least generally speaking.
effective number of parallax stars is therefore essentially reduced.
Indirectly it is nevertheless possible to get a relatively large
method of ADAMS, which permits us to determine the absolute magnitude,
examination of the relative intensity of certain lines in the stellar
 It may be that the method is not yet as firmly based as it
taken is the right one and that the catalogue published by ADAMS of 500
 from Mount Wilson, 142, already gives a more
 I
catalogue.

M.
from the catalogue of WALKEY those stars in his catalogue that belong to
parallax may be considered as rather reliable.
stars, so that a sum of 561 stars with known distance is to be

For all these stars we know _m_ and _M_ and for the great part of them
 We can therefore for each spectral type
 We thus
the attributes.
 We find from
is approximately the same for all yellow and red stars and even for the
and the absolute magnitude equal to +2m.
value of M to be -1m.
6.
motion also varies in the same way, being for F, G, K, M approximately
5 and for B and A 0″.
 As to the mean values of _M_ and μ we cannot
are selected in a certain way which essentially influences these mean
 The most interesting
distribution over different values of _M_.
ADAMS has obtained the following table (somewhat differently arranged
for different values of the absolute magnitude for different spectral

A glance at this table is sufficient to indicate a singular and well
 We find, indeed,
resolvable into two simple curves of distribution.
may distinguish between a bright group and a faint group.
terminology proposed by HERTZSPRUNG the former group is said to consist
 Even in the stars
 This distinction is still more
similar bipartition of the stars.
astronomers have put forward the theory that the stars in space are
 The
stars, with little or no transition between the two classes.
parallax stars are arranged according to their apparent proper motion,
is revealed in their frequency distribution.

must be considered as vague and doubtful.
bipartition is, indeed, necessary in all statistics as soon as
parallax stars are selected from the stars in space.
three attributes, say _A_, _B_ and _C_, of the individuals of a
to the attributes _A_ and _B_, so that to great or small values of _A_
 Now if the
that we choose out individuals having great values of the attributes _A_
regarding the attribute _C_, which consists of two seemingly distinct
 It is in like manner, however, that the
 The reason for this selection is the
 The annual parallax can only be determined for near stars,
 The direct picking out of these stars
 The astronomers have therefore attacked the problem in
 The near stars must, on account of their proximity,
proper motions than those.
essentially limited to (1) bright stars, (2) stars with great proper
 Hence the selected attributes of the stars are _m_ and μ.
_m_ and μ are both positively correlated to _M_.
stars with small _m_ and great μ we get a series of stars which
classes.

that the stars of the types K and M are divided into the two supposed
 There is on the whole no reason to suppose the existence at all
of this kind can be made regarding the height of the men in a
 What may be statistically concluded from the distribution of
_dispersion_ in _M_ is increased at the transition from blue to yellow
 The filling up of the gap between the “dwarfs” and the
distance of the stars is extended, where, however, not the annual

Regarding the absolute brightness of the stars we may draw some
 We find from table 7 that the absolute
stars being of type M.
great distance from us and their absolute magnitude is badly determined.
The brightest star in the table is Antares with _M_ = -4.
is based on the parallax 0″.
 So small a parallax
parallax observations, but is more trustworthy when derived with the
 It is probable from a discussion of the
brightest stars have a magnitude of the order -5m or -6m.
parallaxes smaller than 0″.
Canopus would represent the absolutely brightest star, having _M_ =
17, and next to it we should find RIGEL, having _M_ = -6.
these values are based on an annual parallax equal to 0″.
too small to allow of an estimation of the real value of the absolute

If on the contrary the _absolutely faintest_ stars be considered, the
 Here we have only to do
 In
magnitude greater than 9m.

 The faintest of all known stars is
9.
BARNARD's star with _M_ = 11.
also the nearest of all known stars.
stars is 1.

There is no reason to believe that the limit of the absolute magnitude
there are many stars in space with _M_ > 13m and the mean value of _M_,
of the faint parallax stars in this table.
discussed in a later part of these lectures.

The Science of Astronomy is sublime and beautiful.
consoling, divine, it gives us wings, and bears us through Infinitude.
In these ethereal regions all is pure, luminous, and splendid.
the Ideal, even of the Inaccessible, weave their subtle spells upon us.
The imagination soars aloft, and aspires to the sources of Eternal

What greater delight can be conceived, on a fine spring evening, at the
of twilight, than the contemplation of that grand and silent spectacle
of life die out upon the earth, the last notes of the sleepy birds have

 These
our heads in the inaccessible depths of space.
.
 Gradually they
 There is Venus, the white star of the shepherd.
the little celestial world so near our own.

slowly revolve around it.
.
 What is this nebulous light that blanches
celestial path? It is the Galaxy, the Milky Way, composed of millions on
.
 The darkness is profound, the abyss immense.
.

disappears!.
.

Where is the mind that is not attracted to these enigmas? The
material and prosaic masculine mind, is well adapted to the
 Women, indeed, are naturally
 And the part they are called
that the elements of Astronomy might well be taught by the young mother
first impressions are so keen and so enduring.

Astronomy, not merely in its contemplative and descriptive, but also in
 Of such, the most illustrious was the
era, public lecturer on geometry, algebra, and astronomy, and author of
 Then, in that age of ignorance and
from her chariot while crossing the Cathedral Square, in March, 415,
witch!
Among the women inspired with a passion for the Heavens may be cited St.
Catherine of Alexandria, admired for her learning, her beauty and her
 She was martyred in the reign of Maximinus Daza, about the year

Another celebrated female mathematician was Madame Hortense Lepaute,
by which he predicted the return of Halley's Comet.
wrote Lalande, "gave us such immense assistance that, without her, we
was necessary to calculate for every degree, and for a hundred and fifty
attraction on the comet.
morning to night, sometimes even at table, and as the result of this
for life; but it was important to publish the result before the arrival
"
This extract will suffice for the appreciation of the scientific ardor
 We are indebted to her for some considerable works.
Her husband was clock-maker to the King.
says one of her biographers, "were joined all the qualities of the
 She was charming to a degree, with an elegant figure, a dainty
had made a portrait of her, asked permission to copy it, in order to
" And then we are told that
.

The Marquise du Châtelet was no less renowned.
her career, if the following anecdote be credible.
Breteuil, born in 1706 (who, in 1725, was to marry the Marquis du
was four or five years old when she was given an old compass, dressed up
 After examining this object for some time,
the toy was wrapped in, and after turning it over several times in her
sheet of paper.
indeed the only French, translation of Newton's great work on universal
eloquent propagator of the theory of attraction, rejected at that time

Numbers of other women astronomers might be cited, all showing how

visit he paid in Milan to the young Italian, Marie Agnesi, who delivered
whom mathematics held no secrets.
geometry, which, she said, "are the only provinces of thought wherein
" Madame de Charrière expressed herself in an aphorism of
and puts me in good spirits; I feel that I can eat and sleep better when
 This consoles me for the
I am thankful there is something positive in this world.
Madame de Blocqueville, last surviving daughter of Marshal Davout, who
which I am attracted, and terrified, and which I adore! By it my soul is
spheres that evoked from Newton the triumphant cry: '_Coeli enarrant

of the Heavens, the grandest discoverer of the stars, that has ever
 Astronomy gave her a long career; she discovered no less than
ninety-eight.
 Somerville, to whom we owe the English
pure mathematics, Mrs.
" Like Caroline
than her years: she died at Naples, in 1872, at the age of
--So, too, the Russian Sophie Kovalevsky, descendant of
sixteen, married at eighteen, in order to follow the curriculum at the
husband to live as brother and sister until their studies should be
 In 1888 the Prix Bordin of the Institut was conferred on
--And Maria Mitchell of the United States, for whom Le Verrier gave
authorized by Pope Pius IX to visit the Observatory of the Roman
women.
works on shooting stars, whom the author had the honor of visiting, in

At the present time, Astronomy is proud to reckon among its most famous
_inter alia_, an excellent History of Astronomy in the Nineteenth
 Isaac Roberts, who, under the familiar name of Miss
is D.
 of the Faculty of Paris and head of the Bureau for measuring
English by her marriage with the astronomer Roberts, but is not
 Fleming, one of the astronomers of the
S.
, to whom we owe the discovery of
records, and by spectral photography;--Lady Huggins, who in England is

       *       *       *       *       *
The following chapters, which aim at summing up the essentials of
mathematicians of my readers--much less prigs or pedants.
designed to show the constitution of the Universe, in its grandeur and
living, may realize our position in the Cosmos, appreciate Creation as
 This sun by which we live, this
of the heavens, these starry skies, the divine rays of the moon, the
existence, and it is indeed extraordinary that the inhabitants of our
are, without suspecting the marvels of the Universe.


goddess--the charming enchantress Urania, fit companion of Venus,
more noble, dominating with her clear glance the immensities of the
 Urania, be it noted, is feminine, and never would the poetry
pageant of the heavens.
with the ideal beauty of Urania.

dated the one from the year 1686, the other from a century later, 1786.
The first was written by Fontenelle for a Marquise, and is entitled
 In this, banter is pleasantly
fair readers the amount of application they would concede to a novel.
The second is written by Lalande, and is called Astronomie des Dames.
addressing myself to both sexes, I am in honorable company with these





The crimson disk of the Sun has plunged beneath the Ocean.
decked itself with the burning colors of the orb, reflected from the
 The rolling waves are gold
disappearance of the celestial luminary.

anon so generously over many who were intoxicated with gaiety and
 We dream, contemplating the magnificent spectacle, and in
 Yet the darkness

The most indifferent spectator of the setting Sun as it descends beneath
Nature at such an impressive moment.

sky, is bright enough to cast changing and dancing sparkles of silver
 The Evening Star declines slowly in its turn toward the
 Our gaze is held by a shining world that dominates the
 This is the "Shepherd's Star," Venus of

Little by little, one by one, the more brilliant stars shine out.
are the white Vega of the Lyre, the burning Arcturus, the seven stars of
innumerable eyes that open on the Infinite.
revealed to our imagination, inviting us to soar into these mysterious

O Night, diapered with fires innumerable! hast thou not written in
enigma of Eternity? The contemplation of thee is a wonder and a charm.
How rapidly canst thou efface the regrets we suffered on the departure
our enraptured souls! Where is the man that can remain blind to such a

are revealed to our astonished gaze.
turn to gaze at, and to question us.
every thinking soul, so long as Humanity has existed on our Earth.
saw and sung these self-same stars.
of civilizations that have disappeared, from Egypt of the period of the
Constantine and Charlemagne, down to the Twentieth Century.
generations are buried with the dust of their ancient temples.
are still there, symbols of Eternity.

may seem to overwhelm us.
the wings of dream, toward the remotest regions of the visible.
on one star and another, like the butterfly on the flower.
will best respond to its aspirations: and thus a kind of communication
appeals.
 We feel that, if only as
dumb language of the starry night is more eloquent than any speech.
star becomes a friend, a discreet confidant, often indeed a precious

Is any poem finer than the book written in letters of fire upon the
 And yet, the
not to veil its reality from us.
mystery by which we were enchanted.

human beings, who ever raise their eyes to the starry heavens? How many
these shining specks, and inaccessible luminaries, and really desirous

 You, who read these
account for our existence in this world, who seek to know what the Earth
inquiring after truth is so limited that no one dares to speak of it, so
 And yet!
 What pleasures await
our heart and intellect!
Astronomy is the science _par excellence_.
most ancient of all, inasmuch as it dates back to the indeterminate
 Its mission is not only to make us
illuminated, but it is, moreover, thanks to it that we know where and
 Without it we should live as the blind, in eternal
 Without
entire Universe to our minute globule, making our Humanity the goal of

To-day, thanks to the intellectual labor of so many centuries, thanks
lives to searching after Truth--men such as Copernicus, Galileo, Kepler,
of creation are perceptible in their splendid truth to the dazzled eye

The study of Astronomy is not, as many suppose, the sacrifice of oneself
and the grandeur of the pageant of Nature.
figures, would not be entertaining, even to those most desirous of
 Let the reader take courage! We do not propose that he
 Perish the
do not exist in Nature.

 1.
eyes.

you may not stray from the path of truth, which is also the path of
 Once you have entered upon it, no persuasion will be needed
 And you will have the profound satisfaction of
better to be educated than to be ignorant.
dreams, beyond the most fantastic imagination.
transformations of our theaters, the most resplendent pageants of our
pride itself--all that we admire, all that we envy on the Earth--is as
Infinitude.


If you will yield yourselves to the pleasure of gazing upon the
too rapidly in the contemplation of the Heavens.

which women love to deck themselves, are to be found in greater
Heaven! In the telescopic field, we may watch the progress of armies of

not make up a prodigious panorama? What are our romances in comparison
souls from all the baseness of this world, we strive to become better

       *       *       *       *       *
But in the first place, you ask, what are the Heavens? This vault
 We can not venture to investigate it.

inconceivable, unfathomable, that surrounds us on all sides, and in the
 THE HEAVENS ARE ALL THAT EXISTS,
that bears us onward in her rapid flight; the Moon that accompanies us,
we owe our existence; the Stars, suns of Infinitude; in a word--the

Yes, our Earth is an orb of the Heavens: the sky is her domain, and our
star as the pretty sparkling points that scintillate up there, in the
brilliancy.
her course through Space, bears us with herself into the depths of

In the Heavens there is neither "above" nor "below.
exist in celestial speech, because their significance is relative to the
 In reality, for the inhabitants of the
is above our heads, all round the Earth.
us on all sides, to Infinity.

Uranus, Neptune, one of the planets of the great solar family.

 She, as
 All float in perfect harmony

But, you may say, on what does the Earth rest in her ethereal

 The Earth turns round the colossal Sun, a little globe of
soap-bubble blown by some careless child.

families, and form other systems of worlds revolving round the numerous
that by which we are illuminated, and generally speaking of larger bulk,

Among the ancients, before the isolation of our globe in Space and the
was supposed to be the immobile lower half of the Universe.
regarded as the upper half.
fantastic supports that penetrated to the Infernal Regions.
not admit the notion of the Earth's isolation, because they had a false
 To-day, however, we know positively that the Earth
 The innumerable journeys accomplished round it in
 It is attached to nothing.
As we said before, there is neither "above" nor "below" in the Universe.
What we call "below" is the center of the Earth.
turns upon its own axis in twenty-four hours.
phenomenon, due to the rotary motion of the planet, a motion that could
our globe in space.

 2.
 June solstice, midday.

that is to say one hemisphere, it follows that Night is nothing but the
 As the Earth revolves upon
while the parts situated opposite to the Sun, in the cone of shadow
 But whether it be noon or
even when, dazzled by the ardent light of the orb of day, we can no
the god Phoebus still continues to pour his beneficent rays upon the

The sequence of day and night is a phenomenon belonging, properly
participate.
sun, and endowed with a rotary movement.
succession of nights and days.

planet glides in the open heavens round our Sun.


like those sold on the streets for children to play with, the larger,
 Imagine this group
miniature.

 The balloons are held up by
 The Earth is
 What maintains her in equilibrium is the
 The Sun attracts her,
him, at a speed of 107,000 kilometers[2] (about 66,000 miles) per hour,
is precisely equivalent, and of contrary sign, to its gravitation toward
medium distance.

void that extends indefinitely around us.
that we admire in the depths of the sky, and to which we lift up our
burning with its own light, the chief of a more or less numerous family,
 Notwithstanding
number of these so great, that by an effect of perspective due solely to
touching.
astral photographs, they really do appear to be contiguous.

 Space is limitless.
Heavens should incite in us the impulse, and provide us with the means
should be astonished, on arriving at the confines of the Milky Way, to
before our dazzled eyes; and if in our mad career we crossed this new
should still find universe eternally succeeding to universe before us.
Millions of suns roll on in the immensities of Space.
sides, Creation renews itself in an infinite variety.

as well as here, and has sown the germ of intelligence upon those
that plow the ether, for everything upon the Earth tends to show that
 Burning foci, inextinguishable sources of
the worlds that belong to them and which they fertilize.

 As we have seen, it is one of
which in its turn again is but a star.

 Who can say that their unknown
traversed by waves of thought, as it is by the vibrations of light and
by our imperfect senses, exist between the Celestial Humanities, our

Let us meditate on this Infinity! Let us lose no opportunity of
bewitching nights, in contemplating, admiring, spelling out the words of
 Let our freed souls fly swift and rapt
for us, and let us do homage to the first and most splendid of the

To poetical souls, the contemplation of the Heavens carries thought away
 Who does not
not heard or read them? The poem is called "Ecstasy," and it is a
 The words are sometimes set to music, and the melody


          Mes yeux plongeaient plus loin que le monde réel,
          Semblaient interroger, dans un confus murmure,

          Et les étoiles d'or, légions infinies,
          Disaient, en inclinant leurs couronnes de feu;
          Disaient en recourbant l'écume de leur crête:
.
 C'est le Seigneur, le Seigneur Dieu!
_Note: Free Translation_
          I was alone on the waves, on a starry night,
          My eyes pierced beyond the natural world.
.
          And the woods, and the hills, and the voice of Nature
              The waves of the Sea, and Heaven's fires.

          Sang loudly, and softly, in glad recognition,
.

          Sang, bowing the foam of their haughty crest.
.
              Behold the Lord God--Jehovah!
The immortal poet of France was an astronomer.
once had the honor of conversing with him on the problems of the starry

It is indeed difficult to resist a sense of profound emotion before the
worlds suspended above our heads.
of the Heavens that there is more in the Universe than tangible and
 Our ants' brains
something greater than the Earth, the Heavens;--more absolute than the
the sense of the True, the Good, the Beautiful.
mystery broods over Nature,--over Being, over created things.
here again that Astronomy surpasses all the other sciences, that it
philosophy.

the veil spread above us by the light of day, giving back transparency
the celestial diamonds, the innumerable stars that succeed each other
nothing.
population, our intellects would never have pierced the harmony of the
world isolated from the rest of the universe.
one hand it rests upon the heights of Truth beyond the day's illusions,
penetrating calm, upon our souls that weary of Life's fever.
forget the struggles, perfidies, intrigues, the miseries of the hours of
 Its
 We love it for its peace and calm
 We love it because it is true.
places us in communication with the other worlds, because it gives us
because it proclaims us citizens of Heaven.


CHAPTER II
THE CONSTELLATIONS

all sides, and surrounded at vast distances by a multitude of stars.

 They
 We know this for a fact, because they are so
more, reflect his rays back upon us: and because, on the other hand, we
 Many of these distant
others appear to be the centers of systems analogous to that which
 But these
is impossible to distinguish all the individuals of each particular
 The most delicate observations have only revealed a few of them.
We must content ourselves here with admiring the principals,--the
through the firmament.

named? There are so many of them!
Do not fear; it is quite a simple matter.
Earth we make use of geographical maps on which the continents and seas
 Each country of our
 We
the easier since the Great Book of the Firmament is constantly open to
 Our globe, moreover, actually revolves upon itself so that we
 Given a clear atmosphere, and a little
geography of the Heavens, or "uranography," will soon be as familiar to

On a beautiful summer's night, when we look toward the starry sky, we
 The stars seem to
so close to one another that it would appear rash to attempt to name
 Yet some of the brighter ones particularly attract and
 After a little observation we notice a certain
in drawing imaginary figures round the celestial groups.

 In order
navigators noted certain fixed bearings in the sky, by which they mapped
 In this way they discovered the position of the
 The Chaldean pastors,
their migrations.
Constellations with simple outlines, and gave to each of these celestial
kingdoms.
primitive celestial geography.
reputed the first to divide the Heavens upon the sphere of the
 But this origin is a little mythical! In the Bible we have
years ago.
to an astronomy that had made considerable advance even in those remote
 Our actual constellations, which are doubtless of Babylonian
learned philosopher Eudoxus of Cnidus, about the year 360 B.
 Aratus
 Hipparchus of Rhodes was the
and thirty years before our era.
magnitude, according to their apparent brightness; and his catalogue,
into forty-eight Constellations.

visible only to the eyes of the imagination, and where the ancients
good-will, anything we choose to fancy.
these figures.
constellations in order to find our way among the innumerable army of
most popular and best known of them all, the one that circles every
 Needless to name it; it is familiar
 You have already exclaimed--the Great Bear!
This vast and splendid association of suns, which is also known as the
the finest constellations in the Heavens, and one of the oldest--seeing
thousand years ago.

the following is a very simple expedient for finding it.
North--that is, opposite to the point where the sun is to be found at
 Whatever the season of the year, day of the month, or hour of
magnificent stars, arranged in a quadrilateral, followed by a tail, or
 This magnificent constellation never sinks below
 Night and day it watches above us, turning in twenty-four
with.
quadrilateral are found in the body, and the three at the extremity make
 As David's Chariot, the four stars represent the wheels, and

Sometimes our ancestors called them the Seven Oxen, the "oxen of the
seven oxen of labor) is derived.
familiarly call this figure the Dipper.
its outline varies with the different positions.

the Bear.
 From the Greek word
 From
oxen.
 Is not the word "venerate"

denoting them by the letters of the Greek Alphabet has been adopted, for
number.

known as the "pointers;" [gamma] and [delta] the hind wheels; [epsilon],
 All these stars are of the second order
in the next chapter), except the last ([delta]) of the quadrilateral,

[Illustration: FIG.
--The Great Bear (or Dipper), and the Pole-Star.

 In revolving
prolongation of a line drawn from [beta] to [alpha], it occupies every

 In
a dazzling sun, a center of force and life.
remarkable: [zeta], known as Mizar to the Arabs.
sight will distinguish near it a minute star, Alcor, or the Cavalier,
used as a test of vision.
your disposal, direct it upon the fine star Mizar: you will be
see, with which no brilliant is comparable.
stars; these we shall become acquainted with later on.

 The Great Bear

[Illustration: FIG.
--To find the Pole-Star.

 4) from [beta] through [alpha], which
to the distance of [alpha] from the tip of the handle, we come on a star
comparable with the Great Bear, but smaller, less brilliant, and
 This is the Little Bear, composed,
line by which we have found it is the Pole-Star.

all eyes by its position in the firmament.
mariners who have gone astray on the ocean, for it points them to the
it by all the stars in twenty-four hours.
factor, and we must hasten to find it, and render it due homage.
should be added that its special immobility, in the prolongation of the
planet.
and not the sky.
 In looking
the West to the left.

procession of smaller stars.

We will continue our journey by way of Cassiopeia, a fine constellation
Bear, and shaped somewhat like the open limbs of the letter W.
also called the Chair.
the line [alpha] [beta] below, the line [chi] [gamma] forms the seat,

If a straight line is drawn from [delta] of the Great Bear, and
separates these two stars, it is easy to find this constellation (Fig.
5).
opposite to the Great Bear.
Pole-Star, and is to be seen, now above, now below, now to the right,

[Illustration: FIG.
--To find Cassiopeia.

 6.
]
If in the next place, starting from the stars [alpha] and [delta] in the
beyond Cassiopeia, we arrive at the Square of Pegasus (Fig.
constellation that terminates on one side in a prolongation formed of

These three last stars belong to Andromeda, and themselves abut on
 The last star in the Square of Pegasus is also the first in

[gamma] of Andromeda is a magnificent double orb, to which we shall
e.
marvelous suns, one of which is topaz-yellow, and the other
 Three stars, indeed, are visible with more powerful

[Illustration: FIG.
--Perseus, the Pleiades, Capella.

luminous trail: this is the oblong nebula of Andromeda, the first
the Heavens, perceptible to the unaided eye on very clear nights.

which will serve in a new orientation.
direction of [delta], we find a very brilliant star of the first
 This is Capella, the Goat, in the constellation of the
 7).

we reach the Pleiades, a gorgeous cluster of stars, scintillating like
shall come shortly, in studying the Constellations of the Zodiac.

forms a little triangle with two others smaller than itself.
is peculiar in that, instead of shining with a fixed light, it varies in
 It belongs to the
 All the
a dark star revolves round this sun, almost in the plane of our line of
reduces it from the second to the fourth magnitude, every other two

And now, let us return to the Great Bear, which aided us so beneficently
search of other constellations.

magnificent golden-yellow star, a splendid sun of dazzling brilliancy:
the extremity of this pentagonal constellation.
this asterism are of the third magnitude, with the exception of [alpha],
 Alongside of the Herdsman is a circle consisting
[alpha], or the Pearl, which is of the second magnitude.
Corona Borealis.
 8).

 8.
Crown.

equilateral triangle, the apex of which, situated opposite the Great
ideal purity scintillating through the ether.
first magnitude, is, with Arcturus, the most luminous in our Heavens.
burns with a white light, in the proximity of the Milky Way, not far
of its principal stars in the form of a cross.
Bird, or the Swan (Fig.
Pegasus, and the Milky Way.
constituents (of the third and fourth magnitudes) contrasts strongly
of the Cross, a superb double star, [beta] or Albirio: [alpha] of Cygnus
 The first star of which the distance was
 This little orb of fifth magnitude,
above our Earth, is the nearest of all the stars to the skies of Europe.

 9.
]
Not far off is the fine Eagle, which spreads its wings in the Milky Way,
between its two satellites, [beta] and [gamma].

impelling us, with all the planets of its system, is near the Lyre.
principal stars can be recognized inside the triangle formed by the

All the Constellations described above belong to the Northern
 Those nearest the pole are called circumpolar.
round the pole in twenty-four hours.

which we have left behind us.
and in consequence he seems to revolve round us, sweeping through a vast
 In each year, at the same period, he
constellations, which are rendered invisible by his light.
the stars are at a fixed position from the Earth, whatever their
simply because they are extinguished by the dazzling light of the orb of
 With the aid of a telescope it is always possible to see the more

The Zodiac is the zone of stars traversed by the Sun in the course of a
 This word is derived from the Greek _Zodiakos_, which signifies
on this belt of stars represent animals.
parts that are called the twelve Signs of the Zodiac, also named by the
each month.
distinguish them: the Ram [Aries], the Bull [Taurus], the Twins
Balance [Libra], the Scorpion [Scorpio], the Archer [Sagittarius], the
 The
Bull, and so on.

recognize them again, provided you have a clear picture of the principal
 First, you see the Ram, the initial sign
fixed, the Sun entered this sign at the vernal equinox, and the equator
 This constellation, in which the
between Andromeda and the Pleiades.
regarded as the symbol of spring; but owing to the secular movement of
he is in the Fishes.

forms a triangle in which burns Aldebaran, of first magnitude, a
scintillating pale and trembling, on its forehead.
as we have seen, veil themselves on the shoulder of the Bull--a
eye, while several hundred are discovered with the telescope.

 They are easily recognized by the two fine stars,
immortalize Castor and Pollux, the sons of Jupiter, celebrated for their

Cancer, the Crab, is the least important sign of the Zodiac.
distinguished only by five stars of fourth and fifth magnitudes,
called Præsepe, the Beehive.

 At his heart is a
 This figure forms

The Virgin exhibits a splendid star of first magnitude; this is Spica,
constellation can be recognized.

 Its scales, marked by two stars of

We next come to the eighth constellation of the Zodiac, which is one of
 Antares, a red star of first
 It
forms with Vega of the Lyre, and Arcturus of the Herdsman, a great

The Scorpion, held to be a sign of ill luck, has been prejudicial to the
little to the east of Antares.
never rise much above the horizon for France and England.
Archer is Chiron, the preceptor of Jason, Achilles and Æsculapius.

from the Lyre to the Eagle.
[alpha] and [beta] of third magnitude, which scintillate on its

The Water-Carrier pours his streams toward the horizon.
in stars, exhibiting only three of third magnitude that form a very

Lastly the Fishes, concluding sign of the Zodiac, are found to the
 Save for [alpha], of third magnitude,

These twelve zodiacal constellations will be recognized on examining the
 10-11).

equally deserving of admiration.

 10.
autumn; Capricorn, Archer, Scorpion, Balance, Virgin, Lion.

the Southern Constellations are not, like those which are circumpolar,
 Their visibility depends
[4]
In order to admire the fine constellations of the North, as described
walk round the garden in the mysterious light of these inaccessible
the head of a celestial spear.

winter clothed in hoar-frost.
dreary; but as a compensation the night is much longer, and adorns
her inexhaustible treasures.

 11.
spring; Crab, Twins, Bull, Ram, Fishes, Water-Carrier.

the constellations: he advances like a colossal giant, and confronts the

This constellation appears about midnight in November, in the
due south; about ten in February, in the south-east; about nine in
horizon.

 12.
]
It is indisputably the most striking figure in the sky, and with the
both are referred to in the ancient texts of China, Chaldea, and Egypt.

magnitude, five of the second, and one of the third (Fig.
 The most
marking the right shoulder of the Colossus as it faces us; the second
 The star on the left shoulder is [gamma] or Bellatrix, of

each other, the first or highest of which marks the position of the
 These stars, known as the
recognition of this fine constellation.

band of fog, the apparent dimensions of which are equal to that of the
one of the most magnificent in the entire Heavens.
1656 by Huyghens, who counted twelve stars in the pale cloud.
date it has been constantly studied and photographed by its many
innumerable multitude of little stars which reveal the existence of an

Orion is not merely the most imposing of the celestial figures; it is
 Among these, it exhibits the most
[theta] situated in the celebrated nebula just mentioned.
star, viewed through a powerful telescope, breaks up into six suns,

This region is altogether one of the most brilliant in the entire
 We must no longer postpone our homage to the brightest star
Orion: it returns every year toward the end of November.
star, of dazzling brilliancy, is the first, [alpha], in the
which is adjacent to a triangle erected from the horizon.

stars, Sirius, which attracted all eyes to its burning fires, was the
 After long observation, they succeeded
miles).
kilometers (186,000 miles) per second, takes no less than ten years to

The Little Dog, in which Procyon ([alpha], of first magnitude) shines
 With the exception of [alpha], it has no

[Illustration: FIG.
--Winter Constellations.

the Whale, the Southern Fish, the Ship, and the Centaur.
constellation, while invisible to our latitudes, contains the star that
which is 40 trillion kilometers (25 trillion miles).

 14.
]
The feet of the Centaur touch the Southern Cross, which is always
over the icy desert of the antarctic regions.

 15.
]
[Illustration: FIG.
--Autumn Constellations.

representing the aspect of the starry heavens during the evenings of
 To make use of these, we must
zenith, and the sky descending all round to the horizon.
therefore, bounds these panoramas.
and looking at it from north, south, east, or west, we find all the
 The first map (Fig.
(January) at 8 P.
; the second, in spring (April) at 9 P.
; the third,
(October) at the same time.

beautiful journeys conceivable.
have learned to see and know our own country, for since the Earth is a
such or such a nation of our lilliputian world.







We have seen from the foregoing summary of the principal Constellations
while our eyes are dazzled with the brilliancy of certain orbs, others,
are hardly perceptible to the eye that seeks to plumb the abysses of

We have appended the word "magnitude" to the names of certain stars, and
orb.

To facilitate the observation of stars of varying brilliancy, they have
brightness, and since the dimensions of these distant suns are almost
of first magnitude, those which were a little less bright of the second,
 But in reality this word "magnitude" is quite erroneous, for
when it was supposed that the most brilliant must be the largest.
simply indicates the apparent brightness of a star, the real brilliancy
our planet.

 Throughout
discoverable.
as well be noted of "second magnitude," while the first of the second
" But in
adopted, and it was determined that the first series should include only
subjoined in order of decreasing brilliancy.


fifty-nine.
which is of third magnitude), the Pole-Star, the chief stars in Orion
Cassiopeia, are of this order.
principal outlines of the constellations visible to us.


       *       *       *       *       *
The following table gives a summary of the series, down to the sixth







This makes a total of some seven thousand stars visible to the unaided
 It will be seen that each series is, roughly speaking, three times
number of any class by three, we obtain the approximate number of stars

Seven thousand stars! It is an imposing figure, when one reflects that
incandescent as our own (which exceeds the volume of the Earth by more
attraction on unknown systems.
millions of stars are visible in the firmament.
even the best vision is unable to distinguish stars below the sixth

Again, seven thousand stars for the whole Heavens makes only three
 And we can only see one
 Moreover, toward the horizon, the vapor
 In reality,
 This

       *       *       *       *       *
But celestial space is unlimited, and we must not suppose that these
without which our nights would be black, dark, and empty,[5] comprise
 They only represent the vestibule of the temple.

developing from century to century, plunges its analyzing gaze into the
light of the innumerable suns that it discovers.
the optical instruments.
seventh magnitude.
eighth and ninth orders.

and soon he is able to reckon hundreds of thousands of orbs in the
 The evolution continues, the power of the instrument is
discovered successively, and together number four millions.
the thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth magnitudes.

celestial photography, can bring a stream of more than 120 millions of

The photographic map of the Heavens now being executed comprises the
40,000,000 stars, distributed over 22,054 sheets, forming a sphere 3

The boldest imagination is overwhelmed by these figures, and fails to
through space, sweeping their systems along with them.
there! what unknown lives! what vast immensities!
And again, what enormous distances must separate the stars, to admit of
from our terrestrial atom, must these magnificent and dazzling Suns


calculated on the principle that an object appears smaller in proportion
 But this equality does not exist.
cast in the same mold.

distances that have been measured show that the most brilliant are not
 They are scattered through Space at all distances.

the distance, some are found to be of the fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh,
not always the least distant.

acquaintance in the last chapter may be cited Sirius, which at a
dazzles us with its burning fires; Procyon or [alpha] of the Little Dog,
the Eagle, at 160 trillion kilometers (99 trillion miles); the white
276 trillion kilometers (171 trillion miles); and the Pole-Star at 344
 The light that flies
second, takes thirty-six years and a half to reach us from this distant
e.
traveling for more than the third of a century.
were born, the ray that arrives to-day from the Pole-Star was already
 In the first second after it had started it
which at once makes 600,000 kilometers; add another 300,000 kilometers

If we tried to arrange the number 300,000 (which represents the distance
sum, as many times as is necessary to obtain the distance that
comprise 1,151,064,000 rows, and the sheet of paper required for the
(about 7,000 miles), _i.
_, almost the diameter of our terrestrial

lost in the Heavens at such a distance from his peers in Space? At the
smallest.


neighbor of the South Pole, invisible in our latitudes.
275,000 radii of the terrestrial orbit, _i.
_, 275,000 times 149
kilometers (= 25-1/2 trillion miles).
French billion.
English billion.
translator.
the light takes four years to come from thence.
star.

unaided eye.
 21,185 in the Catalogue
 It almost attains the seventh magnitude (6.
 Its distance

The third of which the distance has been measured is the small star in
Constellations.
miles).
 The light takes seven years to

As we have seen, the fine stars Sirius, Procyon, Aldebaran, Altaïr,

Our solar system is thus very isolated in the vastness of Infinitude.
The latest known planet of our system, Neptune, performs its revolutions
from our Sun.
world, an immense gulf, almost a void abyss, extends to the nearest
 Between Neptune and Centauris there is no
 One or
doubtless traverse those unknown spaces, but all invisible to us.

measuring these distances.

       *       *       *       *       *
Now that we have some notion of the distance of the stars we must

Let us, for example, get close to Sirius: in this star we admire a sun
accompanied by a second sun that revolves round it in fifty years.
light is exceedingly white, and it notably burns with hydrogen flames,

Now let us approach Arcturus, Capella, Aldebaran: these are yellow stars
many other metals can be identified in their spectrum.
older than the first, and the ruddy ones, such as Antares, Betelgeuse,
are on their way to final extinction.

thinker, poet or artist can find inexhaustible subjects of

You have heard of the celestial jewels, the diamonds, rubies, emeralds,


Our Sun, white and solitary, gives no idea of the real aspect of some of
 There are as many different types as there

characteristics: no two are comparable.
justified.
the Heavens, other suns of still greater magnificence form groups of two
double, triple, or multiple systems through space, pouring on to the
now violet, etc.

united in pairs, bound by a common destiny, cradled in the same
conceivable.
joy; there a deep blue sapphire of tender tone; beyond, the finest
 Diamonds of translucent purity and whiteness
space.
profusion!
To the naked eye, the groups appear like ordinary stars, mere luminous
the beauty of these systems; the star is duplicated into two distinct
 These groups of two or several suns are not
e.
more stars in our line of sight; as a rule they constitute real physical
another in a more or less rapid period, that varies for each system.

one of the easiest to perceive, is [zeta] in the Great Bear, or Mizar,
 It has no contrasting
fascinate the gaze, even through a small objective.
[zeta] of the Lyre exhibits a yellow and a green star; Rigel, an
[eta] of Perseus resolves into a burning red star, and one smaller that

       *       *       *       *       *
These exquisite double stars revolve in gracious and splendid couples
multi-colored fires in the midst of the starry firmament.

burning luminary.
conceivable color, but picture the fantastic illumination of the worlds
of blue and roseate, red, or orange light around them! What a fairy

blue, the other red.

 The sapphire sun climbs slowly up the Heavens, coloring
 The blue disk
the East lights up with the flames of a scarlet sun, which in its turn
 The West is plunged in the
the purple and burning rays of the ruby orb.

of this strange world.
destiny.
rays, with which the West is flushed, when the blue orb reappears on the
illuminates, which knows no night.
the Heavens over the common task of renewing a thousand effects of
variations.

are these not fairy visions, dazzling to our poor sight, condemned while

multiple stars.
Andromeda, above mentioned.
its third blue, but the two last are in close juxtaposition, and a
 A triple star more easy
magnitude, at a distance of 1" and 5"; the first two revolve round their
hundred years.
powerful objective (Fig.

[Illustration: FIG.
--Triple star [zeta] in Cancer.

magnitude, which seems a little elongated to the unaided eye, and can
 But on
that each of these stars is double; so that they form a splendid
 19): one of fifth and a half and
4", the other of sixth and
2" distant.

[Illustration: FIG.
--Quadruple star [epsilon] of the Lyre.

in the no less famous Nebula, below the Belt; this star forms a
 20).
different to our Sun, sailing through Space in modest isolation!
Be it noted that all these stars are animated by prodigious motions that

[Illustration: FIG.
--Sextuple star [theta] in the Nebula of Orion.

 On every side throughout Infinity, the burning
giddy speed toward an unknown goal, traversing millions of miles each
to the human intellect.

their secular movements being only manifested on the celestial sphere by
 But in reality these suns are in perpetual
extraordinary animation.

of the Constellations: but these changes will only take effect very
heroines of mythology will keep their respective places in the Heavens,

Examination of these star motions reveals the fact that our Sun is
Constellation of Hercules.
an hour we shall be 70,000 kilometers (43,500 miles) farther than we are
 The Sun and the Earth will never again traverse the space

And here let us pause for an instant to consider the _variable stars_.
Our Sun, which is constant and uniform in its light, does not set the
 A great number of them are variable--either

We are already acquainted with the variations of Algol, in Perseus, due
vision.
properly speaking, variable stars.
intrinsic light of which undergoes actual variations.

a sun, for example, to a star in the southern constellation of the
"wonderful" (Mira Ceti).
light, shedding the gladness of his joyous beams upon nature and in our
 For two months we admire the superb orb, sparkling in the azure
 Then of a sudden, its light fades, and
 Imperceptibly,
anticipation of universal death.
plunged in a kind of penumbra; all nature is saddened in the general

But while we are bewailing the cruelty of our lot, our cherished
 The intensity of its light increases slowly.
brilliancy augments, and finally, at the end of three months, it has
world, flooding it with joy.
splendid blaze will not endure.
fade back to its minimum; and then again revive.
this capricious sun.
from yellow at the maximum, turns red at the minimum.
Ceti, which is one of the most curious of its type, varies from the
others might be instanced.

desert, silent and monotonous.
most fantastic plays are continually being acted.
spectators.

time, and then die out rapidly.
1572, the light of which exceeded Sirius in its visibility in full
all other stars of first magnitude; after which it died out gradually,
peoples, who saw in it the harbinger of the world's end: that of 1604,
second magnitude, in the Northern Crown, which appeared for a few weeks
1891, in the Charioteer; and quite recently, of 1901, in Perseus.

the Earth, and quickly vanish again, are doubtless due to collisions,
 But we only see them long after
centuries ago.
author in 1901, in Perseus, must have occurred in the time of Queen
 It has taken all this time for the rays of light to reach us.


glance within these limits.

Who has not noticed the Milky Way, the pale belt that traverses the
Constellations of the Swan and the Lyre? It is indeed a swarm of stars.
Each is individually too small to excite our retina, but as a whole,
 With opera-glasses we

Herschel.

Universes that succeed each other through the vast spaces to Infinity.

 It surrounds us like a great circle,
feet as well as over our heads.
of star-clusters, varying greatly in extent and number, some projected

[Illustration: FIG.
--The Star-Cluster in Hercules.

known to us, we will select one of the most curious, the Cluster in
stars [eta] and [zeta] of that constellation.
have been taken in the author's observatory at Juvisy, showing some
figure (Fig.
 Is it not a veritable universe?
[Illustration: FIG.
--The Star-Cluster in the Centaur.

the Centaur (Fig.

These groups often assume the most extraordinary shapes in the
outspread wings, etc.

_e.
_, the famous Nebula in Orion, of which we obtained some notion a
Andromeda (Fig.

[Illustration: FIG.
--The Nebula in Andromeda.

 24.
]
Perhaps the most marvelous of all is that of the Greyhounds, which
itself far off in the recesses of space.
 24 gives a picture of it.

 25.
]
Without going thus far, and penetrating into telescopic depths, my
small telescope or opera-glasses, or even with the unaided eye, by
on another page, and using it as a test of vision.
subjoined (Fig.
estimating their magnitudes, which are in the following order:

Good eyes distinguish the first six, sharp sight detects the three

In the times of the ancient Greeks, seven were accounted of equal
time of the Trojan War.
embraced by a god, as were her six sisters.
best sight could then distinguish Pleione, as in our own day.
angular distance from Atlas to Pleione is 5'.

of time, or 1°6' of arc; the breadth, from Merope to Asterope, is
[8]
In the quadrilateral, the length from Alcyone to Electra is 36', and the
 To us it appears as though, if the Full
it entirely, for to the naked eye she appears much larger than all the
 But this is not so.
half the distance from Atlas to Celæno; she is hardly broader than the
Taygeta without touching either of these stars.
very curious optical illusion.
Pleiades, and occults them successively, it is hard to believe one's
 The fact occurred, _e.
_, on July 23, 1897, during a fine
 26).

 26.
]
Photography here discovers to us, not 6, 9, 12, 15, or 20 stars, but

These are the most brilliant flowers of the celestial garden.

 27.
Virgin.

 In contemplating them we are
periods measured by these distant universes often overpower in their

Virgin, sees its two components, translucent diamonds, revolve around
 How
star!--The Regency, Louis XV, Louis XVI, the Revolution, Napoleon, Louis
Franco-German War, the Third Republic.
.
 What revolutions here, during
 27.

 We must

Our Milky Way, with its millions of stars, represents for us only a
 The illimitable abysses of Infinitude are
renewed in all directions through the depths of Space to endless
 Where is our little Earth? Where our Solar System? We are fain
floating island.


CHAPTER IV
OUR STAR THE SUN

thousand superfluous wants of modern "civilization," one is prone to
incalculable number of petty incidents, each more insignificant than the
 Why lose time in thinking or dreaming? We must live at fever heat,
desires and torments.

beauties of Nature, is ill at ease in this perpetual vortex that
relish; love of the beautiful, that one views with indifference; it is a
bottom of her well.

satisfy our pride and vanity! To make ourselves slaves to chimeras! If
enough to note and analyze the details of human existence on the surface
us, to see their statistics.
lives? Is it for this that we struggle, and suffer, and die? Truly it is

And yet the remedy is simple, within the power of every one; but one
immense advantage of lifting us out of the miseries of this weary world
the knowledge of the Truth: we need only open our eyes to see, and to
 Only--one hardly ever thinks of it, and it is easier to let

Think what it would be to consecrate an hour each day to voluntary
toward the Heavens, to share the lessons taught by the Pageant of the
no time to become attached to real interests, no time to pursue them.

nothing without exception has struck the admiration and attention of
which our planet and its life would never have issued from nonentity,
of antiquity.
these pages know that this Sun is a star in the Milky Way, and that
grandeur of the Universe? Inquire, and you will find that the number of
singularly restricted.
fashion of a race of moles.

which, from its proximity, we term a sun.
systems of worlds, our splendid Sun is only a more or less brilliant,
nearer or farther off.
particularly precious; we forget all the sister stars on its account,
knowing what its rôle in the universe may be, simply because they feel
this globe.
our Earth the floods of light and heat to which Life owes its existence

Hail, vast Sun! a little star in Infinitude, but for us a colossal and
 Hail, divine Benefactor! How should we not adore,
gentle caresses by which his rays touch the undulating ears, and gild
within his rays by the mysteriously powerful and delicate cords of
 It is the Sun that we inhale from the embalmed corollas of
reflect his splendors back to us.
foam of the merry wine; that charms our gaze in those first days of
of verdant and flowering youth.
we recognize his work, extending from the infinitely great to the
 We bow to his might, and admire his power.
the sad winter day he disappears behind the snowy eaves, we think his
are alleviated with his languid beams.

hope in the illumination of those beauteous, sunny hours.



creations that we lost sight of our cherished luminary.

cloud we term the Milky Way.
visited the Isles of Light in the Celestial Ocean; let us traverse the

We embark upon a ray of light, and glide rapidly to the portals of our
 Soon we perceive a tiny speck, scintillating feebly in the
 This
we advance toward it.
course, and it shines out like a fine star of the first magnitude.
grows larger and larger.
is shining before us, and gladly alight upon her.
quit our own province of the Celestial Kingdom, but will enter into
affects us so closely.

 28.
]
The Sun, which is manifested to us as a fine white disk at noon, while
whose colossal dimensions surpass those of our terrestrial atom beyond

In diameter, it is, in effect, 108-1/2 times as large as the Earth; that
the Sun would figure as a sphere 108-1/2 meters across.
the accompanying figure (Fig.

If our world were set down upon the Sun, with all its magnificence, all
it would only be an imperceptible speck.
the central orb than one grain in a grenade.
the center of the Sun, with the Moon still revolving round it at her
solar surface would be covered.

times heavier in mass.
though very brilliant disk, is solely on account of its distance.
apparent dimensions by no means reveal its majestic proportions to us.

discover that its surface is not smooth, as might be supposed, but
more somber background.
of a fruit, _e.
_, a fine orange, the color of which recalls the hue of
darkness.
that arise upon the solar surface, and give birth to a Sun-Spot.
centuries scientists and lay people alike refused to admit the existence
Heavens.
defect in him were to do him grievous injury.
incorruptible, those who threw doubt on his immaculate splendor were
 And so when Scheiner, one of the first who studied the
in 1610, no one would believe his statements.

necessary to accept the evidence, and stranger still to recognize that
constitution of the Sun.

parts; first, the central portion, which is black, and is called the
received the name of _penumbra_.
outline; the penumbra is gray, the nucleus looks black in relation to
radiates a light 2,000 times superior in intensity to that of the full

[Illustration: FIG.
--Direct photograph of the Sun.

accompanying reproduction of a photograph of the Sun (taken September 8,
drawing of the large spot that broke out some days later (September 13),
 As a rule, the spots

[Illustration: FIG.
--Telescopic aspect of a Sun-Spot.

on the Earth, are in reality absolutely gigantic.
measured are ten times as large as the Earth's diameter, _i.
_, 120,000

Sometimes the spots are so large that they can be seen with the unaided
 They are not formed
surface, exhibiting, as it were, luminous waves or _faculæ_.
agitation arises a little spot, that is usually round, and enlarges
frequent segmentation and shrinkage.
days; others last for months.
swallowed in the boiling turmoil of the flaming orb.
white incandescent waves emerge, and seem to throw luminous bridges
 As a rule the spots are not very profound.
They are funnel-shaped depressions, inferior in depth to the diameter of
Sun.


learn that the radiant orb revolves upon itself in about twenty-five
 This rotation was determined in 1611, by Galileo, who, while
to west, following lines that are oblique to the plane of the ecliptic,
arrival at the eastern edge.
invisible for fourteen days, reappears upon the eastern edge, where it
 It progresses toward the
the west, and continues its journey on the hemisphere opposed to us, to
extinguished.

the Earth is not stationary, and in its movement round the burning
the spots are still visible two and a half days after they disappeared
 In
but strangely enough this globe _does not rotate in one uniform period_,
parts of the solar surface, diminish from the Sun's equator toward its
 The period is twenty-five days at the equator, twenty-six at the
thirty-seventh degree, twenty-eight at the forty-eighth.
usually formed between the equator and this latitude, more especially
 They have never been seen round

Toward the edges of the Sun, again, are very brilliant and highly
termed _faculæ_ (_facula_, a little torch).
frequently occupy a very extensive surface, seem to be the seat of
monarch, often, as we said, preceding the spots.
right up to the poles.

fierce conflagrations.
the worst cataclysms that sometimes disturb our little world, are gentle
capable at one burst of engulfing globes of the dimensions of our

To compare terrestrial volcanoes with solar eruptions is like comparing
that destroys a town.

years.
g.
frequent; in other years, _e.
_, 1901, they are few and insignificant.
The statistics are very carefully preserved.
surface showing sun-spots expressed in millionths of the extent of the
It is a curious fact that terrestrial magnetism and the boreal auroras
apparently the same occurs with regard to temperature.

burning at high temperature, and giving off a prodigious amount of heat
 The dazzling surface of this globe is called a _photosphere_
 It is in perpetual motion, like the waves of an ocean of
kilometers (9,300 miles) in height.
has received the name of _chromosphere_ (color sphere).
transparent; it is not directly visible, but is seen only during the
entirely concealed by the Moon; or with the aid of the spectroscope.
part of the Sun that we see is its luminous surface, or photosphere.

eruptions, immense jets of flame, geysers of fire, projected at a

For years astronomers were greatly perplexed as to the nature of these
fireworks, and were only visible during the total eclipses of the Sun.
But now, thanks to an ingenious invention of Janssen and Lockyer, these
registered since 1868, more particularly in Rome and in Catania, where
and publishes monthly bulletins in statistics of the health of the Sun.

own storm-clouds; they rise above the chromosphere with incredible
are carried up to the amazing height of 300,000 kilometers (186,000

[Illustration: FIG.
--Rose-colored solar flames 228,000 kilometers
e.
]
The Sun is surrounded with these enormous flames on every side;
plumes; at others they rear their luminous heads in the Heavens, like
 Having illustrated a
a precise observation of these curious solar flames.
here was observed in Rome, January 30, 1885.
kilometers (141,500 miles) in height, eighteen times the diameter of the
 (Fig.
)
Solar eruptions have been seen to reach, in a few minutes, a height of
flaming torrent into that burning and inextinguishable ocean.

prominences to be due to formidable explosions produced within the
hydrogen into space with considerable force.

 During an eclipse one sees around the black disk of the
brilliant and rosy aureole with long, luminous, branching feathers
from the solar surface.
unknown to us, has received the name of _corona_.
immense atmosphere, extremely rarefied.
is a brazier of unparalleled activity--a globe of gas, agitated by
 The smallest of
breath, like the bombs shot out by Vesuvius, that fall back within the

What now is the real heat of this incandescent focus? The most accurate
7,000°C.
 A
ice and snow.

comparisons.
would be emitted by a colossal globe of the same dimensions (that is, as
entirely covered with a layer of incandescent coal 28 kilometers (18
 The heat emitted by
combustion of eleven quadrillions six hundred thousand milliards of tons
 This same heat would bring to the boil in
water at freezing-point.

miles) from the Sun, arrests on the way, and utilizes, only the half of

How is this heat maintained? One of the principal causes of the heat of
 According to all probabilities, the solar
primitive times beyond the orbit of Neptune, and which in its
 In virtue of the
not yet reached its limit, suffices to raise this colossal globe to its
 In


The Sun weighs three hundred and twenty-four thousand times more than
kilograms:
           1,870,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000

In Chapter XI we shall explain the methods by which it has been found

       *       *       *       *       *
I trust these figures will convey some notion of the importance and
depends.
would be hidden from sight, like that of the full moon, which is about
represents, as we have seen, a real dimension that is colossal, _i.
_,
enormous distance that separates us from it.
149,000,000 kilometers (93,000,000 miles) is sufficiently hard to
 Let us say that 11,640 terrestrial globes would be required
Earth to the Moon.
 We
moving at constant speed of 1 kilometer (0.
take 149,000,000 minutes, that is to say 103,472 days, or 283 years, to
 Given the normal
their children, nor their grandchildren, would arrive there: only the
bring us back news of it.

 If one of these inquisitive little
there, it would not feel the burn for one hundred and sixty-seven years
sensation can only be transmitted from the ends of the fingers to the

'Tis long.
 Light, that
(186,000 miles per second), takes only eight minutes seventeen seconds

       *       *       *       *       *
This brilliant Sun is not only sovereign of the Earth; he is also the

The orbs that circle round the Sun are opaque bodies, spherical in
they absolutely depend.
"wandering" stars.
and are sufficiently acquainted with the principal stars of the Zodiac
evenings to see the figure of some zodiacal constellation slightly
in its luminosity the finest stars of the first magnitude.

carefully in regard to the adjacent stars, you will observe that it
 These wandering
illuminated by the Sun.

round the God of Day at a speed proportional to their distance.
number eight principal orbs, and may be divided into two quite distinct
of relatively small dimensions in comparison with those of the second
larger than the other four put together.




The four following, and much more remote, are, still in order of


by quite a little army of minute planets, tiny cosmic bodies, the
diameter, and the smallest some few miles only.

members of the solar family.
daughters has her own children who, while obeying the paternal influence

course, and revolve round them in an ellipse, just as the others rotate
 Every one knows the satellite of the Earth, the Moon.
the other planets of our system have their own moons, some being even
 Mars
(at least as yet discovered).

The Sun is at the center (or, more properly speaking, at the focus, for

 These
planetary revolutions; for while the Earth revolves round the Sun in a
accomplish his journey, Jupiter 12 years, Saturn 29, Uranus 84, and

Even the planets and their moons do not represent the Sun's complete
 There are further, in the solar republic, certain vagabond
occasionally approaching the Sun, not to be consumed therein, but, as it
necessary for their perigrinations through space.
_Comets_, which pursue an extremely elongated orbit round the Sun, to
excessively distant.

 In the first
worlds that belong to him.
eight principal, formed of solid and obscure matter, gravitating round
 Other secondary orbs, the satellites, revolve round the
 And
of the great solar province.
meteors, as it were disaggregated comets, which also circle round the
with the Earth.

of the potent focus that controls it, let us make direct acquaintance





_--MERCURY, VENUS, THE EARTH, MARS

focus of which burns the immense and dazzling orb.
the grandeur and potency of the solar globe, whose rays spread out in
gravitate round him; we have appreciated the distance that separates the
or at least I trust that the comparisons of the times required by
conceive it.

distance of 57 million kilometers (35,000,000 miles); Venus, at 108
miles); and Mars at 226 million (140,000,000 miles).
planetary journey with these four stations.

MERCURY
A little above the Sun one sometimes sees, now in the West, in the
roseate dawn announces the advent of a clear day, a small star of the
and then plunges back into the flaming sun.
and active messenger of Olympus, the god of eloquence, of medicine, of
 One only sees him furtively, from time to
setting or before the rising of the radiant orb, when he presents the

This planet, like the others, shines only by the reflection of the Sun
it, his light is bright enough, though his volume is inconsiderable.
is smaller than the Earth.
accomplished in about three months, he passes rapidly, in a month and a
morning and an evening star.
separate planets; but with attentive observation, they soon perceived
 In our somewhat foggy climates, it can only be discovered
indications given in the astronomic almanacs.

 32.
]
Mercury courses round the Sun at a distance of 57,000,000 kilometers
hours, 15 minutes; _i.
_, 2 months, 27 days, 23 hours, or a little less
 If the conditions of life are the same there
our own.
just beginning in this world, is an octogenarian in Mercury.
fair sex would indeed be justified in bewailing the transitory nature of
 Perhaps,

[Illustration: FIG.
--Orbits of the four Planets farthest from the
]
The orbit of Mercury, which of course is within that of the Earth, is
certain times of the year this planet is extremely remote from the solar
period; and, in consequence, his distance from the Earth varies

[Illustration: FIG.
--Mercury near quadrature.

Galileo, which recall those of the Moon.
the planet round the Sun, and are invisible to the unaided eye, but with
under every aspect.
Sun, and his disk is projected like a black point upon the luminous
 This occurred, notably, on May 10, 1891, and
and November 6, 1914.

of the cosmic fragments that circulate between the orbit of Mars and
 His volume equals only 5/100 that of the Earth.
diameter, in comparison with that of our planet, is in the ratio of 373
miles).
family, and exceeds that of our Earth by about 1/3; but weight there is

Mercury is enveloped in a very dense, thick atmosphere, which doubtless
a luminous disk about seven times more extensive than that with which we
nearest to the Sun), his inhabitants receive ten times more light and
 In all probability, it would be
a sunstroke.

beings there of an organization different from our own, adapted to an
 What magnificent landscapes may
under an ardent and generous sun?
[Illustration: FIG.
--The Earth viewed from Mercury.

of the immediate proximity of the solar furnace; yet some have detected
 In any case, these observations are

Up to the present it has been impossible to determine the duration of
 Some astronomers even think that the Sun's close proximity
immobilized the globe of Mercury, just as the Earth has immobilized the
 From
peculiar; perpetual day upon the illumined half, perpetual night upon
two.
terrestrial days and nights.

sky[9] as a magnificent orb of first magnitude, with the Moon
 They should form a fine double
of third, a charming couple, and admired doubtless as an enchanted and

It is at midnight during the oppositions of the Earth with the Sun that
ourselves.
the Earth.

 We can

VENUS
When the sunset atmosphere is crimson with the glorious rays of the King
indifferent eyes are often attracted and captivated by the presence of a
light the heavens darkened by the disappearance of the God of Day.

of the loves, goddess of beauty, eternally adored and cherished, sung
 Her splendid
radiant and charming, in the works of the ancients, who erected altars
 Homer calls
and Lucifer, the star of the morning--for it was with this divinity as
 For a long while she was regarded as two separate planets,
morning star were always in periodic succession, that the identity of

Her radiant splendor created her mythological personality, just as the

We do not see her aerial chariot in the Heavens drawn by a flight of
led on through space by solar attraction.
when she is at her greatest distance from our Sun, the whole world
twilight[10] for hours after sunset, and in addition to the _savants_
to this celestial splendor, and for a moment millions of human beings
 The brutalities
stifled to the point of checking all aspirations after eternal truth,
nature of those other worlds, and the place occupied by our own planet

[Illustration: FIG.
--The Evening Star.


[Illustration: FIG.
--Successive phases of Venus.

 37 gives some notion of the succession of these, and of the

seconds at a distance of 108 million kilometers (67,000,000 miles), the
 Like Mercury,
illuminated hemisphere is of course turned toward the orb of day, we at
 At such
us her greatest apparent dimension (Fig.
 Sometimes, again, like
round black spot; this happened on December 8, 1874, and December 6,
 These transits
the Sun.

according to her position in relation to the Earth: when she is between
those times that we see least of her surface, because she exhibits to us
 Terrestrial astronomers are accordingly very
 The best
Sun, and shows us about half her illuminated disk--during the day for
light.

 His observations were
affording an evident example of the movement of the planets round the
 They are often visible to the unaided eye with good sight, either

[Illustration: FIG.
--Venus at greatest brilliancy.

increases the difficulties of observing her surface, might be called the
worlds.
to hail in her an abode of joy and happiness, it is most probable that
desirable habitation than our floating island.
of Venus is perpetually covered with cloud, so that the weather there
 No definite geographical configuration can be
astronomers.
contradictory are the observations, and so hard is it to distinguish
 A single night of observation
Evening Star remains obstinately veiled from our curiosity.

tides produced by the Sun upon her seas, or globe in its state of
the Earth did for the Moon, thus obliging her to present always the same
 Certain telescopic observations would even seem to
mechanics.

probability notwithstanding, because he has invariably received a
 He has quite
 Choosing a
planet several times with great attention in the field of the telescope.
The right or eastern border (reversed image) was dulled by the
night.
occasion by a small white patch, a little whiter than the rest of the
exact effect of a polar snow, very analogous to that observed at the
 To the author this white spot on the boreal horn of
sometimes been supposed.


Unfortunately it has proved impossible to distinguish any sign upon the
although these observations were made, with others, under excellent
--Three o'clock in the afternoon, brilliant sun, sky clear
is less dazzling than in the evening.

author from adopting the new hypothesis, in virtue of which the planet,

If this hypothesis were a reality, Venus would certainly be a very
 Eternal day on the one side; eternal night on the other.
Maximum light and heat at the center of the hemisphere perpetually

of Nature are so prodigious, and the law of Life is so imperious, so
conditions, that it would be transcending our rights to declare an
 The currents of
temperature between the two hemispheres, in comparison with which our

Yes, mystery still reigns upon this adjacent earth, and the most
unable to solve it.
and mass of this planet, and its weight at the surface, do not differ
sister to our own, and of the same order, hence probably formed of the
 We further know that, as seen from Venus (Fig.
Earth on which we live is a magnificent star, a double orb more
 It is a dazzling orb of
half magnitude.

realized on any one of them, all at different stages of their degree of
ages.

 39.
]
When we contemplate this radiant Venus, it is difficult, even if we can
to assume that she must be a dreary desert, and not, on the contrary,
dwelling-place, travailing with her sisters in the accomplishment of the

Such are the characteristic features of our celestial neighbor.
quitting her, we reach the Earth, which comes immediately next her in
Sun, but as we shall devote an entire chapter to our own planet, we will
separates Mars from Venus.

It will be seen that Venus is almost identical with the Earth.

MARS
Two hundred and twenty-six millions of kilometers (140,000,000 miles)
that which the Earth takes annually round the same center.

antiquity, all curses seem to have fallen upon him.
and of carnage, the protector of armies, the inspirer of hatred among
international hecatombs.
Venus, the appearance has originated the idea.
a drop of blood in the depths of the firmament, and it is this ruddy
whiteness of Venus made her the goddess of love and beauty.
should the origins of mythology be sought elsewhere than in astronomy?
While Humanity was attributing to the presumptive influence of Mars the
our sorrows, pursued the celestial path marked out for it in space by

This planet is, as we have said, the first encountered after the Earth.
Its orbit is very elongated, very eccentric.
period of 1 year, 321 days, 22 hours, _i.
_, 1 year, 10 months, 21
 The velocity of its transit is 23 kilometers (14.
miles) per second; that of the Earth is 30 (19 miles).
traveling through space at an average distance of 149 million kilometers
average distance of 76 million kilometers (47,000,000 miles); but as its
epochs the two planets approach one another by something less than 60
 These are the periods selected

periods of its greatest proximity, when this planet approaches to within
fifteen years.

greatest distance from the Sun).
us an apparent diameter 63 times smaller than that of the Moon, _i.
_,
magnitude as our satellite viewed with the unaided eye, and an
diameter.

the size of the Earth.
(4,172 miles), and his circumference is 21,125 kilometers (13,000
 His surface is only 29/100 of the terrestrial surface, and his

This difference in volume causes Mars to be an earth in miniature.
we study his aspects, his geography, his meteorology, we seem to see in
excite our curiosity, and make him even more interesting to us.

 If we
represented by 105.
7/10 that of the Earth.
adjacent globe, would weigh only 26 kilograms.

less accentuated markings upon the surface of Mars.
optics, admitting of greater magnifications, exhibited the form of these
astronomers to determine with remarkable precision the diurnal rotation
 It occurs in 24 hours, 37 minutes, 23.
 Day
the difference is obviously inconsiderable.
668 Martian days.
upon the plane of its orbit is much the same as our own.
consequence, its seasons are analogous to ours in intensity, while twice
 The
since the orbit of Mars is very elongated.
quite distinct zones: the torrid, the temperate, and the glacial.

seasons, especially in what concerns the polar snows, which regularly
of the summer.
clearly with dazzling whiteness.
accompanying figure, which sums up the author's observations during one
 The size of the polar cap
 The solstice of the Martian
 The snows were still melting on July 6th.
Sometimes they disappear almost entirely during the Martian month that

it does not appear to be colder, or, at any rate, it is certain that the

On the other hand, there are hardly ever clouds on Mars; the Martian
the chronic state of the planet.
will appear in certain regions, but they are soon dissipated, and the

[Illustration: FIG.
--Diminution of the polar snows of Mars during
]
Since the invention of the telescope, a considerable number of drawings
between these numerous observations gives us a sufficient acquaintance
of its geography, and of drawing out _areographic_ maps (_Ares_, Mars).
Its appearance can be judged of from the two drawings here reproduced,
general chart drawn from the total sum of observations (Figs.
43).

different from that of our own globe: while three-quarters of the Earth
divided, and must indeed have rather more land than water.
immense oceans surrounding the continents, and separating them like
between the shores, like the Mediterranean for example, nor is it even
 It has been
to give the name of _continent_ to the spots colored yellow.
hue of the Martian soil, due either to the soil itself, which would
on the line between Marseilles and Nice, in the vicinity of the
 During ascents in a
with the Sun shining on it, is precisely that presented to us by the

[Illustration: FIG.
--Telescopic aspect of the planet Mars (Feb.
1901).

some kind of liquid, deriving above all from the melting of the polar
some vegetation, aquatic plants, or perhaps vast meadows, which appear
that nourishes them has been more abundant.

 42.
,
]
Mars, like our globe, is surrounded with a protective atmosphere, which
favorable to the conservation of life upon the surface of the planet.
But the circulation of the water, so important to terrestrial life,
evaporation of the seas, clouds, winds, rains, wells, rivers and
above, it is rarely that any clouds are observed there.
vertical, as here, this circulation is horizontal: the water coming from
and returns to be condensed at the poles by a light drift of invisible
 There is never any rain.

 One of the great puzzles of the Martian
surface in all directions, and seem to connect the seas.

who discovered them in 1877, called them canals, without, however,
 Are they indeed canals?
length, and more than 100 kilometers (62 miles) in breadth, have much
 For a quarter of a century
 But it
Mars at a distance of 60,000 kilometers (37,200 miles), which is still a
details of the surface.
produce the appearance of canals to our eyes.
of lakes, or oases.
us.

 43.
]
As to the inhabitants of Mars, this world is in a situation as
discover any reason for perpetual sterility there.
the contrary, by its rapid and frequent variations of aspect, to be a
 Its atmosphere, which is always clear, has not the
 The
delicate, more ethereal.

winter; the seasons unfold, less disparate than our own, of which we
 The sky is perpetually clear.
There are never tempests, hurricanes, nor cyclones, the wind never gets
low intensity of weight.

habitation.
 It
 Its astral
just as our successors a million years hence, for example, will be less
all the worlds, and, moreover, the physical constitution of the planet

There is no need to despair of entering some day into communication with
 The luminous points that have been observed are no
setting sun.
more audacious and no less scientific than the invention of spectral

We may suppose that the study of astronomy is further advanced in Mars
because the starry sky is far finer there, far easier to study, owing to

Two small moons (hardly larger than the city of Paris) revolve rapidly
 The former, at a distance
revolution rapidly, in seven hours, thirty-nine minutes, and thus makes
 The second
center of attraction in thirty hours and eighteen minutes.
satellites were discovered by Mr.
in the month of August, 1877.


by the Martians, at certain epochs of the year,--now at night when the
the aurora,--is a magnificent star of first magnitude, never far removed
Venus to ourselves.
most flattering names from those who contemplate it, this radiant star
satellite, sparkling like some splendid diamond, after sunset, in the
 This superb orb is the Earth, and the little star

[Illustration: FIG.
--The Earth viewed from Mars.

doubtless they have determined her phases.
must have been wafted toward her, more than one broken heart must have
abode of happiness where all who have suffered in their native world
 But our planet, alas! is not as perfect as they

We must not dally upon Mars, but hasten our celestial excursion toward





_--JUPITER, SATURN, URANUS, NEPTUNE.

Before we attack the giant world of our system, we must halt for a few
and that of Jupiter.
which measures scarcely more than 100 kilometers (62 miles) in diameter,
at the time when the solar system was only an immense nebula; and which,
Jupiter, split up into a considerable quantity of particles constituting
Asteroids.

celebrated of the minor mythological divinities--Ceres, Pallas, Juno,
, but as they rapidly increased in number, it was found
daughter of Eve, the Egeria of some astronomer, now has her name
 The first minor planet was discovered on the
astronomer at Palermo.
constellation of the Bull beneath the clear Sicilian skies, this famous

The next night, directing his telescope to the same part of the Heavens,
observations of the following days left him no doubt as to the nature of
constellations, revolving round the Sun.
under the name of Ceres.

occupying a zone that extends over a space of more than 400 million
 These celestial globules are invisible
being added to the already important catalogue of these minute asters by
 To-day, they are most frequently
the tiny moving points upon an exposed sensitive plate.

JUPITER
And now let us bow respectfully before Jupiter, the giant of the worlds.
This glorious planet is indeed King of the Solar System.

and Mars 6,728 kilometers (4,172), Jupiter is no less than 140,920
larger than the Earth.
circumference.

a million times smaller than the Sun.
of our system, Mercury, Venus, the Earth, and Mars combined, would form
 A hundred
whose extent would still not be quite as vast as the superficies of this
 This immense globe weighs 310 times more than that which
 Its density is only the quarter of our own; but weight is
 The constituents of
the Earth; but, as the planet exerts a force of attraction twice and a
 A
immediately be included in the imposing society of the "Hundred Kilos.

 He accomplishes
as long as here, and while we reckoned fifteen days upon our calendar,
 As Jupiter's year equals nearly
Obviously, our pretty little pocket calendars would never serve to

This splendid globe courses in space at a distance of 775,000,000
 Hence it is five times
2) as remote from the orb of day as our Earth, and its orbit is five
 At that distance the Sun subtends a diameter
twenty-seven times less extensive; accordingly this planetary abode
obtain.

be exhibited by a world covered with clouds, and enveloped in dense
 45).

revolutions by which it is perpetually convulsed, for although of more
arrived at the stable condition of our dwelling-place.
considerable volume, this globe has probably preserved its original

in the pristine times of terrestrial genesis.

 45.
]
Since its orbital revolution occupies nearly twelve years, Jupiter
e.
34 days, that is with one month and four days' delay each year.
periods it is located at the extremity of a straight line which, passing
 These are the epochs to be
 It shines then, all night, like some dazzling
confounded either with Venus, more luminous still (for she is never
evening, or South-east in the morning), nor with Mars, whose fires are

In the telescope, the immense planet presents a superb disk that an
appearance as that of the Moon seen with the unaided eye.
not absolutely spherical, but spheroid--that is, flattened at the poles.
The flattening is 1/17.

her orbit, and that it is this inclination that produces the seasons.
Now it is not the same for Jupiter.
vertical throughout the course of his year, and results in the complete
 There is neither glacial zone, nor
the season of the equinox, and the vast world enjoys, as it were,
 It knows neither the hoar-frost nor the snows of
 The heat received from the Sun diminishes gradually from the
and night is equal there throughout the entire year, under every
 A privileged world, indeed!
It is surrounded by a very dense, thick atmosphere, which undergoes more
distance.
showing that this planet still possesses a very considerable quantity of

Most conspicuous upon this globe are the larger or smaller bands or
chocolate hue) by which its surface is streaked, particularly in the
 These different belts vary, and are constantly
 Sometimes, they are irregular, and
patches.
the seas and continents of the Earth; nor do they circulate round the
revolutions, but are relatively mobile, like our clouds in the
period of the rotation of Jupiter.
disk to vanish very quickly; others subsist for a considerable period.

almost immobile upon this colossal globe.
its first appearance, is now pale and ghostly.

kilometers (9,300 miles) in width.
as the diameter of our Earth; that is, relatively to the size of

a sort of continent in the making, a scoria recently ejected from the
 The
island.

one period_.

revolution in 9 hours, 50 minutes, 29 seconds.
equator is therefore carried forward at a speed of 12,500 meters (7
produced the flattening of the poles.
swiftness of the currents diminishes irregularly, and the difference
stream, and that of the northern and southern currents.
curious still is that the velocity of one and the same stream is subject
speed of the equatorial current has progressively diminished.
the velocity was 9 hours, 49 minutes, 59 seconds, and now it is, as we
substantial reduction.
the southern latitude, is effected in 9 hours, 55 minutes, 40 seconds.

 It is the world

This giant gravitates in space accompanied by a suite of five
The four principal satellites of Jupiter were discovered at the same
astronomers who were pointing their telescopes at Jupiter: Galileo in

On September 9, 1892, Mr.
California, discovered a new satellite, extremely minute, and very near
 It has so far received no name, and is known as the
distances.

 46.
]
The four classical satellites are visible in the smallest instruments
 46): the third is the most voluminous.

 Once, doubtless, this
of vitality from him with his intrinsic light: to-day, however, these
light which they receive from our solar focus, illuminating the brief
twilight) with their variable brilliancy.

_fourteen hundred times_ vaster than that of the Full Moon! What a
the inhabitants of that tiny world! And what a shabby figure must our
the great solar system!
Our ancestors were well inspired when they attributed the sovereignty of
 His brilliancy corresponds with his
 His dominion in the midnight Heavens is unique.
again, as for Venus, Mars, and Mercury, astronomy has created the legend

Let us repeat in conclusion that our Earth becomes practically invisible




We had to cross 775 million kilometers (480,000,000 miles) when we left
space at 626 million kilometers (388,000,000 miles) from the terrestrial
 From Jupiter we had to traverse a distance of 646 million
Saturn, where our eyes and thoughts must next alight.

 He is
 His mythological
seen for the brilliant Jupiter, for the pale Venus, the ruddy Mars, and
 The revolution of Saturn is the slowest of any among
 It takes almost thirty years for its
still shines with the brilliancy of a star of the first magnitude,
 Here is, indeed, the god of

Poor Saturn won no favor with the poets and astrologers.
horrid reputation of being the inexhaustible source of misfortune and
with our world nor its inhabitants.

million kilometers (881,000,000 miles) from the Sun.
times farther from the orb of day than the Earth, though still
 Its gigantic orbit is ten times

Its revolution round the Sun is accomplished in 10,759 days, _i.
_, 29
great rapidity in 10 hours, 15 minutes, its year comprises no less than
 What a calendar! The Saturnians must needs have a
number of days.
thirty of our own, and where the day is more than half as short again as
 But we shall presently find other and more extraordinary

In the first place it is nearly nine and a half times larger than our
 It is a globe, not spherical, but spheroidal, and the flattening
even Jupiter.
kilometers (69,750 miles), while its polar diameter measures only

In volume, Saturn is 719 times larger than the Earth, but its density is
e.
are much less heavy, so that it weighs only 92 times more than our
 Its surface is 85 times vaster than that of the Earth, no

[Illustration: FIG.
--Saturn.


in relative intensity.
for seven years.
heat and light which it receives from the Sun are 90 times less active
of great density, which may be constituted so that the heat is
inferior to our own.

those of Jupiter, though they are broader and less accentuated (Fig.
47).
in the atmosphere.
calculating the diurnal motions of this globe.

the existence of a vast _ring_, which is almost flat and very large, and
 It is suspended in the
20,000 kilometers (12,400 miles) above the equator.
is circular, like an immense crown illuminated by the Sun.
only see it obliquely, and it appears to us elliptical; a part of the
planet, while the opposite part passes behind.

diameter, and less than 100 kilometers (62 miles) in breadth, is divided
center, which is always brighter than the planet itself; the interior is
through which Saturn can be distinguished.

planet with a luminous halo? They are composed of an innumerable number
a rapid revolution, and gravitate round the planet at variable speed and
 The nearer particles must accomplish their revolution in 5
prevent them from being merged in the surface of Saturn: their own

[Illustration: FIG.
 Varying perspective of Saturn's Rings, as seen
]
With a good glass the effect of these rings is most striking, and one
of the brothers of our terrestrial country is crowned with a golden
 Its aspects vary with its perspective relative to the Earth, as
 48).

months for the inhabitants of Saturn; eight moons with constantly

miles) that separate us from the last station but one of the immense



emigrated to England, having abandoned the study of music to devote
fields with their constellations of golden stars, when he perceived a
celestial luminaries in diameter.
telescope by more powerful eye-pieces, and found that the apparent
the power, which does not happen in the case of stars at infinite
 His observations on the following evenings enabled him to note
sphere, and left him in no further doubt: there was no star, but some
dared not predict the discovery of a new planet.
the name of cometary orb, that the seventh child of the Sun was
 The astronomers sought to determine the motions of the new
have.
conclusion was reached that here was a new planet, throwing back the
frontier, as admitted from antiquity.

nearest neighbor in the solar empire.
a small star of sixth magnitude, invisible to the unaided eye for
miles) from the Sun.
larger than Mercury, Venus, Mars, and the Earth together, thus

His diameter may be taken at about 55,000 kilometers (34,200 miles),
diameter.
times more extensive in surface, this new world is much less than our
 The matter of which it is composed is nearly five times

Spectral analysis shows that this distant planet is surrounded with an
that do not exist in ours.

seventeen times larger than our own, and its revolution lasts 36,688
e.
 It travels slowly and sadly under the
hundred times less of light and heat than we receive.
the solar disk would present a diameter seventeen times smaller than
 A
are in the habit of being bored must find time even longer upon Uranus
 And if
babble in its nurse's arms, would already have lived as long as an old

But what most seriously complicates the Calendar of the Uranians is the
revolution in four different kinds of months, in two, four, eight, and
The most curious fact is that these satellites do not rotate like those
 While the moons of the Earth, Mars, Jupiter, and
Uranus rotate in a plane almost perpendicular to the ecliptic, and it is

If we had to quit the Earth, and fixate ourselves upon another world,
from terrestrial arrangements? But who knows? Perhaps, after all, this
 _Il ne faut jurer de
_


us.
Heavens in eternal twilight at a distance of more than four milliard
the planetary orbs, we once again admire the prodigies of science.

 In
upon each other that slightly deranges the harmony ordered by the Sun.
The stronger act upon the weaker, and the colossal Jupiter alone causes
 Now during regular
irregularities were soon perceived.
the universality of the law of attraction, could not do otherwise than
situated even farther off.

indicates approximately the relative distances of the planets from the
 It is as follows: Starting from 0, write the number 3, and double


Then, add the number 4 to each of the preceding figures, which gives the


Now it is a very curious fact that if the distance between the Earth and
Mercury, 7 that of Venus, 16 of Mars; the figure 28 stands for the
and Uranus agree with 52, 100, and 196.

of the Uranian problem, supposed naturally that the disturbing planet

disturbances; the orbit of Uranus bulging, as it were, on the side of

On August 31, 1846, Le Verrier announced the position of the
astronomer, Galle, at the Observatory of Berlin, who had just received
Heavens designated, and, in fact, attested the presence of the new orb.
Without quitting his study table, Le Verrier, by the sole use of
mysterious stranger.

than was expected from the preceding law, for it gravitates at a

This planet was called Neptune, god of the seas, son of Saturn, brother
 The name is well chosen, since the King of the Ocean lives
plunged in the semi-obscurity of the depths of the celestial element.
But it was primarily selected to do justice to an English astronomer,
and obtained the same results--without publishing them.
remained in the records of the Greenwich Observatory.

the water and find it salt, they feel themselves "at home," and know
complimentary nomenclature.

million kilometers from the solar center.

the Sun and our world, Neptune receives nine hundred times less light
e.
our globe are furnaces compared with what must be the Neptunian
 Absolutely invisible to the unaided eye, this world

appears to be slightly tinged with blue.
larger than our own, and measures about 48,000 kilometers (29,900
to attain its volume we should have to put together fifty-five globes
 Weight at its surface must be about the same as

It gravitates slowly, dragging itself along an orbit thirty times vaster
_i.
_, 164 years, 9 months.
several generations of terrestrial life.
strange in that tortoise-footed world!
While in their rotation period, Mercury accomplishes 47 kilometers
rolls along his immense orbit at a rate of only 5-1/2 kilometers (about

The vast distance that separates us prevents our distinguishing any
absorbent atmosphere in which are gases unknown to the air of our
atmosphere of Uranus.

 It has a considerable

       *       *       *       *       *
And here we have reached the goal of our interplanetary journey.
visiting the vast provinces of the solar republic, we feel yet greater
illuminates the worlds of his system.

viewed from Mercury, Venus, and Mars,--begins to disappear from Jupiter,
side of the Sun, and occasionally passing in front of him as a small
 From Saturn the visibility of our planet is even more
 As to Uranus and Neptune, we are invisible there, at least to
 We do not possess in the Universe the

Neptune up to the present guards the portals of our celestial system; we
to the Earth, we must glance at certain eccentric orbs, at the mad,
space.


CHAPTER VII
THE COMETS
SHOOTING STARS, BOLIDES, URANOLITHS OR METEORIC STONES

these discussions! We first surveyed the magnificent host of stars that
suns very differently constituted from our own; then returning from the
these mysterious luminaries, the distant torches of our somber night,
and brilliant day-star.
system, in which our Earth is a floating island.
be incomplete if we omitted certain more or less vagabond orbs, that
with us upon their celestial path.
comets, then the shooting stars, the fire-balls, and meteorites.

wings glide lightly through Space, shedding a momentary illumination by
 Whence come they? Whither are they bound?
What problems they propound to us, when, as in some beautiful display of
light!
But first of all--what is a Comet?
If instead of living in these days of the telescope, of spectrum
the liberation of the human spirit by Astronomy, we should reply that
mortals in the purity of the immaculate Heavens, to announce the most
 Is a comet visible
to die.
advent of grievous pestilence.
their fertile imagination might hazard every possible conjecture, seeing
sublunar world.

the middle of the last century cursed the apparition of these hirsute
fatal effluvia upon the head of poor Humanity.
superstitions and fears that they inspired of old would furnish matter
 But, on the other hand, the volume
 Despite
prejudices attaching to the most famous comets whose passage, as

[Illustration: FIG.
--Great Comet of 1858.


relation between the Great Comet of 43 B.
 and the death of Cæsar, who
 It was, they asserted,
empyrean after ruling here below.
Earth and Heaven?
We must in justice recognize that certain more independent spirits
reply of Vespasian to his friends, who were alarmed at the evil presage
me not; rather should it threaten my neighbor the King of the Parthians,
"
In the year 837 one of these mysterious visitants appeared in the
 It was in the reign of Lewis the Debonair.
perceived the comet, he sent for an astrologer, and asked what he was to
 As the answers were unsatisfactory he
fast to all his Court, and by building churches.
died three years later, and the historians profited by this slender
of the Sovereign.
of Halley, in one of its appearances.

moment when William of Normandy was undertaking the Conquest of England,
staying at home and annexing England, thus by his action founding the
 A beneficial

A few centuries later it again came into sight from the Earth, in 1456,
 Feeling
anger of the Almighty.
rescued from a struggle in which they were being worsted.
conjuncture, Pope Calixtus resuscitated a prayer that had fallen into
be rung each day at noon, that the Faithful might join at the same hour
 This custom has lasted down

Again, to the comet of 1500 was attributed the tempest that caused the
discovered the Cape of Good Hope.

more serious spirits were influenced by this menacing comet, which
" In a chapter on
awful phenomenon in terms anything but seductive, or reassuring, showing
 50).

 50.

_After Ambroise Paré (1528).

 51.
Forefathers.


Deer and warriors, July 19, 1550.

]
Our fathers saw many other prodigies in the skies; their descendants,
 51, of the
Book of Prodigies.

Estates, which were so vast that "the Sun never slept upon them,"
with an alarming brilliancy, into passing the rest of his days in prayer

It is certain that comets often exhibit very strange characteristics,
be lively.
fire, bloody crosses, flaming daggers, etc.
to destroy our poor human race!
At the time of the Romans, Pliny made some curious distinctions between
Javelin darts forth like an arrow; if the tail is shorter and ends in a
shines like a sword, without rays; the Plate or Disk is named in
shaped like a barrel, as it might be in smoke, with light streaming
and the Lamp that of a burning flame; the Equine represents a horse's
 There are bristled
surrounded by a nebulosity.
been seen to menace the sky in the form of a lance.

are sometimes actually perpendicular to the plane of the ecliptic,
 Even in the seventeenth century the
them, like most of his contemporaries, emanations from the earth, a sort
 These erratic orbs could not be
generally speaking, everything goes on in regular order.

sight of a flaming comet? Has not the end of the world by the agency of
periodic; they crop up each time that the return of these cosmical
certain number of timid souls who are troubled as to our destinies.


that govern the universe.
planets, they were obedient to universal attraction; that they must
focus of the ellipse.
progress of the comet of 1682, and ascertained that its motions
believed himself justified in identifying them and in announcing its
 Faithful to the call made upon it,
ardent and incandescent, returned at the date assigned to it by

able to snatch the profoundest secrets from the Heavens!
This fine comet returns every seventy-six years, to be visible from the
eyes of man.
 Its
sooner than its average period, the attraction of Jupiter having this

The comets thus follow a very elongated orbit, either elliptic, turning
 In the first case,
 52), and their return can be calculated.
second they surprise us unannounced, and return to the abysses of

[Illustration: FIG.
--The orbit of a Periodic Comet.

to this, multiplied by the square root of 2, that is to say by 1.

meters (18 miles) per second, multiplied by the above number, that is,
 At the distance of Mercury it = 47 ×
414 or 66,400 meters (over 40 miles) per second.

twenty of which the orbit has been determined.
bearded orbs is thus exceptional, if we think of the innumerable
 Kepler did not
are fishes in the sea.
regular army, and if we are only acquainted with the dazzling generals
detected in the telescope.
these wanderers in the firmament roamed through space as in our own day,
 Then they were

 They have lost in prestige and
the solar system with new members.
announcement of three or four new arrivals.
that attract general attention by their splendor are rare enough.

opaque body like the Earth, Venus, Mars, or any of the rest.
transparent nebulosities, of extreme lightness, without mass nor
 We have just photographed the comet of the moment, July, 1903:
nucleus.

reanimate themselves in the burning, luminous, electric solar center.

inquisitive and ardent, to warm themselves at its furnace.
and feeble, they are born again when the Sun caresses them with his
 Their motions accelerate, they haste to plunge wholly into
 At length they burst out luminous and superb, when
with a marvelous radiance, and crowns them with glory.
generous.
butterflies that flutter round him as round some altar of the gods, he
.
.

adventurer in returning to the Sun passes near some great planet, such
 It

point at which it felt the first pangs of a new destiny.
it belongs to our celestial family, and circles in a closed curve.
Otherwise, it is free to continue its rapid course toward other suns and

       *       *       *       *       *
As a rule, the telescope shows three distinct parts in a comet.
first the more brilliant central point, or _nucleus_, surrounded by a
appendix stretching out into the _tail_.
brush and the nucleus combined.

 53.
]
It is usually supposed that the tail of a comet follows it throughout
 Nothing of the kind.
even precede the nucleus; it is always opposite the Sun,--that is to
from the Sun, and passing through the nucleus (Fig.
 The tail does
but in approaching the Sun, the nebulosity is heated and dilates, giving
dimensions vary considerably for each comet.
transformations undergone by the tail suggest that they may be due to a
doubtless through the ether.
with unprecedented force.

vicinity of the Sun.
more condensed toward the center, without, however, showing any distinct
 These stars are only visible for a minute fraction of their
orbit.

1861, 1874, 1880, 1881, and 1882.
spreading terror over certain peoples, notably in Russia, became the
 As the wine was particularly good and
influence of the celestial visitant.

our Heavens.
February 28th, alongside of the Sun.
accompanied by a marvelous rectilinear tail measuring 300,000,000
that it turned the solar hemisphere at perihelion in two hours,

But the most curious fact is that this radiant apparition passed so near
them safe and sound.

 49), discovered at Florence
 Its tail extended to a length of 90,000,000 kilometers
kilometers (559 miles).
remarkably excellent and abundant in that year also.


Coggia's Comet, in 1874, was also remarkable for its brilliancy, but was
 Finally, the latest worthy of mention
 This magnificent comet also touched the Sun, traveling
 It crossed the
through infinity.
could be detected with the unaided eye in full daylight, enthroned in
 For the rest, it was

Since 1882 we have not been favored with a visit from any fine comet;
magnificence: first, because now that we have fathomed them we are no
closely.


imagination of our ancestors so vividly, are no longer formidable.
mass is inconsiderable; they seem to consist mainly of the lightest of
 Analysis of their incandescence reveals a spectrum closely
particularly obvious.
transparent.

of these orbs were to arrive directly upon us.
motion into heat, and the combination of the cometary gases with the
poisoning of the atmosphere.


orbit at the exact moment at which the planet was passing.
think of the immensity of space, of the extraordinary length of way
of its rotation, we see why this coincidence is hardly likely to occur.
Thus, among the hundreds of comets catalogued, a few only cut the
 One of them, that of 1832, traversed the path of our
only passed the same point thirty days later, and at the critical period
comet.

tail of the Great Comet of that year.
 The

In 1872 we were to collide with Biela's Comet, lost since 1852; now, as
disagreeable situation, because the comet had disintegrated, and was
 So we may sleep in peace as regards future danger
 There is little fear of the

These ethereal beauties whose blond locks float carelessly upon the
preoccupation than to race from sun to sun, visiting new Heavens,
 They speed
space.

birth! If these splendid fugitives could relate the story of their
of the various abodes they have journeyed to! But alas! these mysterious
respect their enigmatic silence.

impalpable nothing, sufficient, however, to enable us to address our

       *       *       *       *       *
Can there be any one upon the Earth who has not been struck by the
brilliant silver or golden track--the luminous, ephemeral trail of a

above the weary Earth, a shining speck is seen to detach itself in the
constellations to lose itself in the infinitude of space.

 54.
]
These bewitching sparks attract our eyes and chain our senses.
Fascinating celestial fireflies, their dainty flames dart in every
the fields of Heaven.
yet the impression which they make upon the imagination of mortals is of

The young girl dreaming in the delicious tranquillity of the transparent
 54).
not this adorable star announce to the tender and loving heart? Is it
appearance fills the soul with a ray of hope and makes it tremble.
a golden beam that glides into the heart, expanding it in the thrills of
.
.
velvet of the deep blue sky to respond to the appeal of the imploring

What secrets has it not surprised! And who bears malice against it? It
wishes, and associate it with their dreams.
wish be formulated during the visible passage of a meteor it will
 Between ourselves,
for this celestial jewel takes no such active part in the doings of
.
.

the Earth, shooting stars should on the contrary have been regarded with
 And what is a shooting star? These
true stars.
general from the disintegration of comets.
distance, from millions on millions of miles, and circle in swarms
resembles that of the cometary orbit.
reaching sometimes more than 40 kilometers (25 miles) per second, a
terrestrial vehicle, which amounts to 29 to 30 kilometers (about 19

These little corpuscles are not intrinsically luminous; but when the
the speed of which may be as great as 72 kilometers (45 miles) in the
however, does not exceed 30 to 40 kilometers (19 to 25 miles), for these
 The height at which they
miles) at the moment of disappearance of the meteor; but shooting stars

The friction caused by this collision high up in the atmosphere
 The molecules incandesce, and burn like

But their glory is of short duration.
the shock consumes the poor firefly; its remains evaporate, and drop
in a sort of ferruginous dust mixed with carbon and nickel.
hundred and forty-six milliards of them reach us annually, as seen by
showers of meteoric matter is an insensible increase in the mass of our
the lunar movements of revolution.

visible every night of the year, there are certain times when they
 The most
morning of November 14th.
10th, because they arrive in the fine warm summer evenings so favorable
 The phenomenon lasts till the
 When the sky is
counted on those three nights, sometimes thousands.
come from the same quarter of the Heavens, which is called the
Perseus, whence they have received the name of _Perseids_.
forefathers also called them the tears of St.
feast of that saint is on the same date.
very elongated ellipse, and their orbit has been identified with that of

The shower of incandescent asteroids on November 14th is often much more
 In 1799, 1833, and 1866, the meteors were
the first two dates.
stars.
reproduce (Fig.
(November 12, 1799, 3 A.
).
 The

radiant is situated in the constellation of the Lion.

 55.

_From a contemporary drawing.

far as Uranus, and comes back to the vicinity of the Sun every
 Hence we were entitled to expect another splendid
disappointed.
these celestial visitors failed to bring about the desired result.
notes made in observatories, or in balloons, admitted of the
 The maximum was
 During that night, some 200 shooting stars were counted.
were more in 1900, 1901, and, above all, in 1902.
displaced.

stars that are the disaggregated remains of the Comet of Biela.
comet, discovered by Biela in 1827, accomplished its revolution in six
astronomers who expected its return as fixed by calculation.
January 13, 1846, the celestial wanderer broke in half: each fragment
1852.
 That year the twin comets could
 Soon they vanished into
 They were looked for in
shattered comet, came a magnificent rain of shooting stars.
through the Heavens, numerous as the flakes of a shower of snow.

hypothesis of the demolition and disaggregation of Biela's Comet into

       *       *       *       *       *
There is an immense variety in the brilliancy of the shooting stars,
to the incandescent _bolides_ or _fire-balls_ that explode in the

Fig.
observed at the Observatory of Juvisy on the night of August 10, 1899.
It arrived from Cassiopeia, and burst in Cepheus.

 It is often
sometimes perceptible to a considerable distance, and by a shower of
 The globe of fire bursts, and splits up into luminous
 The different parts of the
or rather of uranoliths, since they arrive from the depths of space, and

From the most ancient times we hear of showers of uranoliths to which
of _Sideros_ to iron, the first iron used having been sidereal.

 56.
August 10, 1899.

 57.
February 10, 1896.

uranoliths, and the phenomenon sometimes causes great alarm to those who
 One of the most remarkable explosions is that which occurred

front of the National Museum (Fig.
 The phenomenon occurred at 9.
A.
, in brilliant sunshine.
that it even illuminated the interior of the houses; an alarming clap of
explosion of dynamite had occurred.
fourteen miles, and was seen as far as 435 miles from Madrid!
In one of Raphael's finest pictures (_The Madonna of Foligno_) a
 58), the painter wishing
4, 1511.

The dimensions of these meteorites vary considerably; they are of all
blocks exposed in the Museum of Natural History in Paris.
weigh several million pounds.
during the shower of meteors of November 27, 1885.
pounds.

 58.
Foligno_).

they do not appear to have the same origin as the shooting stars.
may arise from worlds destroyed by explosion or shock, or even from
 The lightest of them may have been expelled from
 Some of the most massive, in which iron
projected into space by some volcanic explosion, at an epoch when our

proportional to the initial speed imparted to them.
the more admissible as the stones that fall from the skies exhibit a

[Illustration: FIG.
--A Uranolith.

our Earth, and from henceforward we will remain upon it, to study its
Universe, and of the astronomical laws that govern our destiny.


CHAPTER VIII
THE EARTH

globe that gravitates between Mars and Venus (between War and Love),
Sun.

theater of our activities, our ambitions, our joys and sorrows.
not, in fact, to ignorant eyes, represent the whole of the universe?
And yet, what is the Earth?
The Earth is a star in the Heavens.
lesson.
Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, etc.
 Isolated
that it accomplishes in a year.
of solar attraction, the terrestrial ball rotates rapidly upon itself in

These statements may appear dubious at first sight, and contradictory to

Now that the surface of the Earth has been explored in all directions,
we adhere to.
always yields the most complete evidence of the spherical nature of the
 On the other hand, the curvature of the seas is a no less certain
 When a ship reaches the dark-blue line that appears to separate
 Little by
tops of the masts being the last to disappear.
ship witnesses the same phenomenon.
disappear, while the high coasts and mountains are much longer visible.


the horizon in the one direction or the other, and those which shine in
 If the surface of the
sight could pierce the distance, and all the stars of the Heavens would

Lastly, during the eclipses of the Moon, the shadow projected by the
 This is another proof of the

We described the Earth as an orb in the Heavens, similar to all the
 We see these sister planets of
brilliancy is sometimes dazzling.
birds hovering in the ether, upheld by invisible wings.
just the same.
 Like the soap-bubble that
the balloon rapidly cleaving the air, it is isolated from every kind of

Some minds have difficulty in conceiving this isolation, because they

The astronomers of antiquity, who divined it, knew not how to prevent
 They asked anxiously what the strong bands

 Then they
placed at the poles.
rested? All these fanciful foundations of the Earth had to be given up,
 This illusion
globule, arises, as we said, from a false conception of weight.


A body can only fall when it is attracted, drawn by a more important
 Now, in whatever direction we may wander upon the globe, our feet
 _Down_ is therefore the _center_ of the Earth.

its attraction holds us at its surface.
 We
below, whatever the direction of our steps.
inside of our planet, and "above" is the immensity of the Heavens that

This once understood, where could the Earth fall to? The question is an
 "Below" being toward the center, it would have to fall out of

Let us then picture the Earth as a vast sphere, detached from all that
 A point diametrically
 New Zealand is
 Well, for the inhabitants of New
or the feet, are diametrically in opposition.
the other, the bottom is the soil they are held to, and the top is

The Earth turns on itself in twenty-four hours.
_e.
_, at midday, we call high; twelve hours later, at midnight, we
at noon.
under our feet, and yet always in the sky, twelve hours later.
position, in relation to the space that surrounds us, changes from hour

Our planet is thus a ball, slightly flattened at the poles (by about
 Its diameter, at the equator, is 12,742 kilometers (7,926
flattening of the polar caps.
(about 27 miles).

 This ball is
can not be less than 300 kilometers (186 miles), according to the

We all know that this layer of air, at the bottom of which we live, is a
spreading over our heads in a kind of vault that is often filled with
horizon.
 In reality, there is neither
 If the atmosphere
stars by day as by night, for they are continually round us, at noon as
astronomical instruments.
the dazzling Jupiter) pierce the veil of the atmosphere, and are visible

The terrestrial surface is 510,000,000 square kilometers (200,000,000
 The waters of the ocean cover three-quarters of this
e.
miles), and the continents only occupy 136,600,000 square kilometers
 France represents about the thousandth part of

Despite the asperities of mountain ranges, and the abysses hollowed out
to its volume its surface is smoother than that of an orange.
highest summits of the Himalaya, the profoundest depths of the somber

In weight, the Earth is five and a half times heavier than would be a
 That is to say:
          6,957,930,000,000,000,000,000,000 kilograms

The atmospheric atmosphere with which it is surrounded represents.

          (6,151,000,000,000,000 tons).

upon his shoulders.
crushed by this weight, which is out of all proportion with our
 It is
equal and opposite to the external atmospheric pressure, and these

The Earth is characterized by no essential or particular differences
 Like Venus of the limpid
through space, carrying into Infinitude our hopes and destinies.
than Mercury, Venus, and Mars, she presents a very modest figure in
Uranus, and even of Neptune.
serves as our residence, and if she were not our habitation we should
 Dark in herself, she burns at a distance like a
 At the
times larger and more luminous than our gentle Phoebe.
Mercury or Venus, she embellishes the midnight sky with her sparkling
 Seen from Mars, she is a brilliant
and Venus show from here.
more than an insignificant point, nearly always swallowed up in the
 As to the Saturnians, Uranians, and Neptunians, if such
 And in all

We must cherish no illusions as to the importance of our natal world.
is true that the Earth is not wanting in charm, with its verdant plains
plants and flowers, its spring-time and its birds, its limpid rivers
vast and profound seas animated with an infinite variety of living
 The spectacle of Nature is magnificent, superb, admirable
suffices for it.
seem to have been created for us, to charm our eyes and thoughts, to
 This is
 If our Humanity were extinguished,
, would none the less
the close of human life (for which everything seems to us to have been
nevertheless are our neighbors.
cataclysm.
do to-day, shedding their divine light over the immensity of the
 Nothing would be changed in the general aspect of the Universe.
The Earth is only a modest atom, lost in the innumerable army of the

       *       *       *       *       *
Every morning the Sun rises in the East, setting fire with his ardent
 He ascends through
West, to sink at night into the purple of the sunset.

incandesce.
then descend to the West, and vanish.
stars, appear to revolve round us in twenty-four hours.


Whether the Earth be at rest, and the sky animated with a rotary
and the Earth in motion, in either case, for us appearances are the
 If the Earth turns, carrying all that pertains to it in its
unable to perceive it, because all the objects that surround us keep
 Hence we must resort to

For the accomplishment of this rapid journey of the Sun and stars around
in some way attached to a vault, or to circles, as was formerly
 This conception is childish.
notion of the size of the universe, and their error is almost excusable.
The distance separating Heaven from the Infernal Regions has been
skies to the Earth in nine days and nine nights, and it would have
Earth to the bowels of Hades.

 We
another.
the difficulty there would be in admitting the rotation of the universe

The distance from here to the Sun is 149,000,000 kilometers (93,000,000
 In order to turn in twenty-four hours round the Earth, that orb
kilometers (6,200 miles) a second.

the planets, a colossal globe, over a million times more voluminous than
immense revolution in order to turn round the minute point that is our

an argument.
 We should have to
fantastic motions.

have to be 53,000 kilometers (32,860 miles) per second.

kilometers (198,000 miles) per second.

times that of the Sun, would have to run, to fly through space, at a

All the other stars are incomparably farther off, at infinity.

point!
To put the problem in this way is to solve it.
astronomic measures, and the most convincing geometric operations, the

To suppose that the stars revolve round the Earth is to suppose, as one
chimney, the kitchen, the house, and all the countryside must needs turn

If the Earth turns in twenty-four hours upon itself, a point upon the
second.
observed upon the surface of our planet, is as nothing compared with
order to rotate round our globe.

entire Heavens turn round us in twenty-four hours, or to suppose our
 For us, the
Earth, its immobility would seem almost natural to us.
resort, here as in many other instances, the decision must be made by
 Science long ago made its choice.
progress of Astronomy has confirmed the rotary movement of the Earth in
year; while at the same time a great number of other motions have been

The learned philosophers of antiquity divined the double movement of our
 The disciples of Pythagoras taught it more than two thousand
Syracuse, and Aristarchus of Samos, as being among the first to promote
 But at that remote period no one
not seem to be based on any adequate evidence.
discussion of the diurnal motion of our planet, refutes it, giving as
fixed to its surface would appear to move in a contrary direction, and
starting-point, the Earth having turned meantime from West to East.
objection has no weight, because the Earth controls not only all the
surround it like a light veil, and all that exists upon its surface.
atmosphere, the clouds, the waters of the ocean, things and beings, all
movement, as sometimes happens to ourselves in the compartment of a
 When, for instance, we drop an object
does not fall to a point below the aerostat, but follows the balloon, as
 The author has made this

Thus, the hypothesis of the Earth's motion has become a certainty.
in addition to reasoning, direct proof is not wanting.

 The spheroidal shape of the Earth, slightly flattened at the poles
the centrifugal force that it engenders.

 In virtue of this centrifugal force, which is at its maximum at the
farther removed from the polar regions where centrifugal force is almost

3.
in seconds is shorter at the equator than in Paris, and the difference

4.
should follow the vertical if the Earth were motionless.
frequently repeated, shows a slight deviation to the East, of the
 We more especially observed this at

5.
under the auspices of the Astronomical Society of France, demonstrates
 A sufficiently heavy
edifice by an excessively fine steel thread.
motion, a point attached to the bottom of the ball marks its passage

gradually longer to the right hand of an observer placed at the center
 The plane of the oscillations remains fixed, but the
 The fundamental principle of
oscillate remains invariable even when the point of suspension is
 This demonstration enables us in some measure to see the Earth

The annual displacements of the stars are again confirmatory of the
 During the course of the year, the stars
ellipses, in perspective, in the Heavens.
variations in the position of the nearest stars reproduce the annual

We could adduce further observations in favor of this double movement,
in the mind of the reader.

space.
another series of _ten more motions_: some very slow, fulfilling
renewed.
into the detail reserved for more complete works.
that our present aim is to sum up the essentials of astronomical
of the picking.


measure of time, the day of twenty-four hours, and the year of 365-1/4

The Earth turning upon itself in twenty-four hours from West to East,

Earth, are plunged into night.
the Sun have morning, those borne toward his shadow, evening.
which receive the rays of the day-star directly have noon; those which

The rotation of our planet in this way gives us the measure of time; it
hour into sixty minutes; each minute into sixty seconds.

of the Earth.
the globe is therefore regulated by the difference of geographical
 The countries situated to the West are behind us; the Sun only

[Illustration: FIG.
--Motion of the Earth round the Sun.

at midday from some place to go round the globe, and traveling westward
 In traveling
gains by one day; in taking the opposite direction, from East to West,

In reality, the exact duration of the Earth's diurnal rotation is
 That is the
 But, while turning upon itself, the Earth circulates upon
turn during three minutes, fifty-six seconds in order to present exactly
period of our planet, is a little behind.
twenty-four hours.

And now let us come back to the consequences of the Earth's motion.
the first place our planet does not turn vertically nor on its side, but

Now, throughout its annual journey round the Sun, the inclination
 That is what produces the seasons and climates.
countries which have a larger circle to travel over in the hemisphere of
circle, shorter days.
through the year, a twelve-hour day, and a night of twelve hours.

 61.
]
In summer, the pole dips toward the Sun, and the rays of the orb of day
 Six months later
turn presented to the Sun.
northern hemisphere, and is at the same time winter for the southern
 Six months later, on December 21, we have winter, while the
 Between these two
March 21, we have the spring equinox, that delicious flowering season
autumn equinox, melancholy, but not devoid of charm.

the different climates are in relation:
1.
of the equator.
 It is limited by the circle

2.
latitude, and where the Sun sets every day.

 The glacial zones, drawn round the poles, at 66° 33' latitude, where
or even several months.
circles.

supposed to pass through the center of the globe and come out at two
 The diurnal rotation

The name _equator_ is given to a great circle situated between the two

go from one pole to the other.
(see Fig.
 The distance between the equator and the pole is divided
_latitudes_, 90 degrees are reckoned on the one side and the other of
respectively.
or West: the latitudes are reckoned North and South, from the equator.
In going from East to West, or inversely, the longitude changes, but in

[Illustration: FIG.
--The divisions of the globe.
latitudes.

poles.
equator.
meters.
in order to accomplish its rotation in twenty-four hours than a point

We have already stated that this velocity of rotation is 465 meters per
 At the latitude of Paris it is not more than 305
 At the poles it is _nil_.

dividing the Earth into quarters, like the parts of an orange or a
 These circumvent the globe, and measure some 40,000,000
 We may remember in passing that the length of the
the quarter of a celestial meridian.

vast orbit traced at 149,000,000 kilometers (93,000,000 miles) from the
out.
its perihelion (_peri_, near, _helios_, Sun), than at its aphelion
 The difference = 6,000,000 kilometers
than at aphelion.

 It is accomplished in three

 It
 But this is not how we calculate
 The civil year, known also as the tropical
gyratory motion, called "the precession of the equinoxes," the cycle of
minutes in each year.

hours, forty-eight minutes, forty-six seconds.

hours, forty-eight minutes, forty-six seconds (about a quarter day) is
have uneven years of three hundred and sixty-five, and three hundred and
 Every year of which the figure is divisible by four is a
 By adding a quarter day to each year, there is a surplus of
 These are subtracted every hundred
radical is not divisible by four.
1800, and 1900 were not; 2000 will be.
calendar and nature has thus been fairly perfect, since the

Since the terrestrial orbit measures not less than 930,000,000
Earth flies through Space at 2,544,000 kilometers (1,577,280 miles) a
miles) per second on an average, a little faster at perihelion, a little
 This giddy course, a thousand times more rapid than
noise.
carries us along in the vast fields of the Infinite, in mid-heaven.

human race has not exhibited great sense in fixing the New Year on
 No more disagreeable season could have been selected.
further, as the ancient Roman names of the months have been preserved,
"September," is our ninth month; October (the eighth) is the tenth;
has taken the place of the twelfth.

 Witness the
the left hand and counting the knobs and hollows of the fist, the former
January; first hollow, February; second knob, March; and so on.

 63.
]
Should not the real renewal of the year coincide with the awakening of
greater portion of Humanity, with the date of March 21st? Should not the
the beautiful evolution dictated by the Sun and by the movement of our
inhabitants will become reasonable.


CHAPTER IX
THE MOON

the silent night.

 All sound is
 And soon the stars will shine out one by one in the bosom of the
 Opposite to the sunset, in the east, the Full Moon
eternity, while her limpid night spreads over space like a dew from

In the odorous woods, the trees are silhouetted strangely upon the sky,
 On
splendor, the maidens go to seek the floating image of their future
 And in response to their prayers, she rends the veil of cloud
beams upon the sleeping waters.

attracting the particular attention of mortals.
been wafted to her pale, yet luminous disk? Orb of mystery and of
once sad and splendid in her glacial purity, and her limpid rays provoke
 Mute witness of terrestrial
its course as a faithful satellite.

the brilliancy of this solitary globe, straying among the stars.
Moon first suggested an easy division of time into months and weeks, and
phases.

terrestrial nebula, when our world was still no more than a vast gaseous
solar tide.
Earth by indissoluble ties of attraction, she rotates round us in a
day in relation to the stars.
from the new moon, we shall observe that she is each night a little
 This
the measure of our months.

 64.
]
During her monthly journey she always presents the same face to us.
might think that the fear of losing us had immobilized her globe, and
 And so we only know of her the vague sketch

It seems, in fact, as though she were looking down upon us from the
the aspect of a face.
instruments we observe dark regions and clear regions that each
 To the author, for instance, the full
 The spots
figure, as indicated on the lower disk.
bundle of wood, a hare, a lion, a dog, a kangaroo, a sickle, two heads
[13] But generally speaking, there is a tendency to see a

If this appearance is helped a little by drawing, it gives the profile
crop of hair (Fig.
 Others go much more into detail, and draw a
 Jean Sardou
 67).
 Zamboni, see behind the man's profile
 68).
certainly some imagination about these.
occasion, look at the Moon through an opera-glass, a few days after the
described, and even to imagine the "kiss in the Moon.

 65.
]
[Illustration: FIG.
--The Man's head in the Moon.

the least powerful instruments: the spots are better defined, and the
 Compare this direct photograph of
 69): here is neither
configurations, and in the lower region, a luminous point whence certain

indicated?
[Illustration: FIG.
--Woman's head in the Moon.

instruments by Galileo, in 1609, people tried to find out what the dark
light, and reflects it less than _terra firma_.
possesses no intrinsic light, any more than our planet, and only shines
 As it rotates round the
see more or less of its illuminated hemisphere, and the result is the

[Illustration: FIG.
--The kiss in the Moon.

 69.
]
At the commencement of each lunation, the Moon is between the Sun and
 This
of Diana sheds a gentle radiance upon the Earth.
enlarges.
the Sun, half the illuminated hemisphere is presented to us.
first quarter.
see the whole of the hemisphere illuminated.
brilliant disk is slightly corroded at first; it diminishes from day to
profile before she once more passes in front of the Sun: this is the

[Illustration: FIG.
--The Moon's Phases.

after the last quarter, the rest of the disk is visible, illuminated
 This is known as the ashy light.
to the shine of the Earth, reflecting the light received from the Sun
 Accordingly the ashy light is the reflection of our own sent
 It is the reflection of a reflection.

twenty-seven days, seven hours, forty-three minutes, eleven seconds; but
returns to the same point (the Earth having become displaced relatively
position between the Sun and the Earth, so that the lunar month is
days, twelve hours, forty-four minutes, three seconds.
duration of the sequence of phases.

(238,000 miles).
kilometer (0.
 But our planet sweeps it through

The diameter of the Moon represents 273/1000 that of the Earth, _i.
_,

Its surface = 38,000,000 square kilometers (15,000,000 square miles), a
= 510,000,000 (200,000,000 square miles).

 Its mass or
 Its density = 0.
relatively to that of the Earth, _i.
_, a little more than three times
 Weight at its surface is very little: 0.
 A kilogram

       *       *       *       *       *
At the meager distance of 384,000 kilometers (238,000 miles) that
Moon is a suburb of our terrestrial habitation.
distance amount to? It is a mere step in the universe.

projectile fired from a gun would arrive in eight days, five hours; an
 It is only
the 100/1,000,000 part of the distance of the stars nearest to us.
men have tramped the distance that separates us from the Moon.
of thirty terrestrial globes would suffice to unite the two worlds.

celestial spheres.
selenographical, _Selene_, moon) map was drawn out more than two
details, until to-day it is as precise and accurate as any of our

Before the invention of the telescope, from antiquity to the seventeenth
strange lunar figure.
extraordinary in that it always presented the same face to us.
compared it to an immense mirror reflecting the image of the Earth.
Others pictured it as a silver star, an enchanted abode where all was
 For many a long day it was the fashion to think,
bigger than ourselves.

of truth into these fantastic assumptions.
Galileo revolutionized science, and his discoveries filled the
 Thenceforward, the Moon became our
installed itself, had the means of getting there been as swift as the
 It became easy enough to invent a thousand
scrupled to do so.
the Earth in its geological features; its surface bristles with sharp
of the Sun.
moreover, there are large gray patches that were supposed to be seas
countries.
constitution of the Moon, and it was figured as enveloped with an
our respiration.

lunar globe possesses an atmosphere, it must be excessively light.

observations made of it authorized the delineation of very interesting
 In order to find one's way among the seas, plains,
them.
reputed astrological influences.
Sea of Fecundity, the Lake of Death, the Sea of Humors, the Ocean of
Dreams, the Sea of Putrefaction, the Peninsula of Reverie, the Sea of

With regard to the luminous parts and the mountains, it was at first
fear of giving offense acted as a check on Hevelius and Riccioli,
prudent to transfer the names of the terrestrial mountains to the Moon.
The Alps, the Apennines, the Pyrenees, the Carpathians, are all to be
adequate, the scientists reasserted their rights, and we meet in the
as well as other more modern and even contemporaneous celebrities.

published by the author measures not less than a meter, with the
the limits of this little book.
lunar mountains, with the numbers corresponding to them upon the map.
discoveries in science, and at the present time we can say that we know
own planet.
within a few feet.
Earth.

than the planet, and the plutonian giants are much more numerous there
 If we have peaks, like the Gaorisankar, the highest of the
(29,000 feet) is equivalent to 1/1140 the diameter of our globe, there
g.
Doerfel and Leibniz, the height of which is equivalent to 1/470 the

Tycho's Mountain is one of the finest upon our satellite.
with the naked eye (and perfectly with opera-glasses) as a white point
 At the
the lunar globe.
sparkles in space.
is that they are all hollow, and can be measured as well in depth as in
 A type of mountain as strange to us as are the seas without
craters, with no summits, nor covers.

prolonged into the heart of the mountain, sometimes far below the level
hundred kilometers, one is obliged, if one does not want to go all round
the depths and cross there, to reascend the opposite side, and return to
 These alpine excursions incontestably deserve the name of

soil: never was ground so tormented; never globe so profoundly shattered
 The mountains are accumulations of enormous rocks
sees nothing but dismantled ramparts, or columns of pointed rocks like

As we said, there is no atmosphere, or at least so little at the bottom
 No clouds, no fog, no rain nor
 The sky is an eternally black space, vaultless, jeweled with stars

Let us suppose that we arrive among these savage steppes at daybreak:
takes a month to illuminate the entire circuit of the Moon; there are no
 If we
absence of atmosphere there can be no sort of twilight.
the dark horizon come flashes of the solar light, striking the summits

the Sun takes only two minutes and a quarter to rise, on the Moon it
weak for some minutes, and increases excessively slowly.
aurora, but lasts a very short time, for when at the end of half an
eye as when it is entirely above the horizon; the radiant orb is seen
 It rises slowly, like
sky in which the stars shine all day, since they are not hidden by any

[Illustration: FIG.
--The Lunar Apennines.

temperature of the Moon analogous to that perceived on the high
the solar heat to concentrate itself upon the surface of the soil, as it
is not kept in by anything, and incessantly radiates out toward space.
In all probability the cold is extremely and constantly rigorous, not
even during the long days of sunshine.

lunar topography.
 72) is taken in the neighborhood of
three deep rings, Archimedes, Aristillus, and Autolycus: the second
 73) depicts the lunar ring of Flammarion,[14] whose outline is
little craters.
Nasmyth, the second in Germany by Krieger: they both give an exact idea
illumination.

visible from the Earth, and exhibits this peculiarity that it is
constantly be admired, by day as well as by night; and it is also of
 This orb, some four times as large as
surface, is our Earth, which presents to the Moon a sequence of phases
direction.
terrestrial hemisphere turned toward our satellite, and we get "Full
hemisphere of the Earth is turned toward the satellite, and we get "New
quarter, and so on.
aspects.

 73.
]
What a curious sight our globe must be during this long night of
it from first quarter to full earth for the middle of the night, and
to see it thus stationary in the sky, and turning on itself in

[Illustration: FIG.
--Lunar landscape with the Earth in the sky.

us are gratified by the sight of a splendid nocturnal torch, doubtless
globe is studded, and shaded in a tender tone of bluish emerald-green.
The royal orb of their long nights, the Earth, gives them moonlight of
presence in the lunar sky must produce marvelous and absolutely

Maybe, they envy us our globe, a dazzling dwelling-place whose splendor
extent of cloud that veils its seas and continents, and they observe its
revealed in succession to its admirers.

inhabitants of our satellite as if they really existed.
desolate aspect of the lunar world, however, rather brings us to the
authorization for affirming this.
beyond doubt.
atmosphere that allowed the white volcanic ashes to be carried a long
still so striking.
all its asperities of outline, a little heaped up on the side to which
 The magnificent photographs recently made at the
 Loewy and Puiseux are splendid evidence of
 In this era of planetary activity there were liquids
to have been entirely absorbed.
that Nature nowhere remains infertile, and that the production of Life
expense, sooner than abstain from developing.
difficult to suppose that the lunar elements can have remained inactive,
 Yes,
ourselves, and perhaps may still be, although this globe has run through
daughter is relatively older than the mother.

proportion with their masses.
quickly than the Earth.

The progress of optics brings us already very close to this neighboring
 'Tis a pity we can not get a little nearer!
A telescopic magnification of 2,000 puts the Moon at 384,000/2000 or 192
 Practically we can obtain no
enlargements.
used.
 Undoubtedly,
intelligence.
in regard to lunar life.

turn even a modest field-glass upon our luminous satellite, at about
the Sun, is at its greatest value.
this period, for choice at the hour of sunset, you will be astonished at
 Its outlines, its laces, and embroideries,
palpitating in the ether.
purer, and more celestial, than this lunar globe floating in the silence
illumination that floods it.
impression, watching a great ring half standing out, and following the
silvered peaks.
999,999/1,000,000 of the inhabitants of our planet should pass their
others which the divine Urania scatters so profusely beneath the





Among all the celestial phenomena at which it may be our lot to assist
and imposing is undoubtedly that which we are now going to consider.

captivate us with a mysterious and sometimes fantastic attraction.
gladly allow our thoughts, mute questioners of the mysteries of the
them.
us the tale of their distant journeys.
beauty speaks of the immensity of the universe.

nearly, and take place in our vicinity.

little province, and witness the picturesque effects of the combined

Have you ever seen a total eclipse of the Sun?
The sky is absolutely clear: no fraction of cloud shadows the solar
 The azure vault of the firmament crowns the Earth with a dome of
 The fires of the orb of day shed their beneficent

Yet, see! The radiance diminishes.
gradually corroded.
it, and little by little invades it entirely.
wan, sepulchral hue; astonished nature is hushed in profound silence; an
 Night comes on suddenly,
 It seems as though by some
 But this
 The divine orb is not extinct.
emerges from the shadow, announcing his return, and when he reappears we
 He is still the
worlds.

not fail to produce a vivid impression upon the spectators of the superb

The eclipse lasts only for a few moments, but long enough to make a deep
terror and agitation--even at this epoch, when we know that there is

In former days, Humanity would have trembled, in uneasy consternation.
Was it a judgment from Heaven? Must it not be the work of some invisible

be deprived eternally of the light of our good Sun? Was some monstrous

universal in Asia as in Africa, and still finds acceptance under more
 But our readers already know that we may identify the
be greatly flattered by the comparison.

describing an almost circular orbit that she travels over in about a
 In consequence of this motion, the nocturnal orb is sometimes
angle in relation to the Sun and the Earth.
occur invariably at the time of New Moon, when our satellite passes
moment of Full Moon, when the latter is opposite to the Sun, and behind

This fact soon enabled the astronomers of antiquity to discover the

The Moon, passing at the beginning of its revolution between the Sun and
 In
 On the other hand, when it is
Full Moon, our planet may intercept the solar rays, and prevent them
 The Moon is plunged into _the shadow of the
 Such is the very simple explanation of the
 But why is there not an eclipse of the Sun at each New Moon,

Sun, it would eclipse the Sun at each New Moon, and would be itself
 But the plane of the lunar
eclipses can only be produced when the New Moon or the Full Moon occur
e.
the Moon, and the Earth are upon the same straight line.
of cases, instead of interposing itself directly in front of the
below him, just as its passage behind us is nearly always effected a
opposite the Sun.

light of the radiant orb, and conceals a greater or less portion of the
 The eclipse is partial if the Moon covers only a portion of
visible all round the lunar disk, as appears when the Moon, in her

On the other hand, when the Moon arrives immediately within the cone of

more marked in that she owes all her brilliancy to the light of the orb
 The Moon's obscurity is complete if she is entirely plunged into
 In this case, the eclipse is total.
of her disk emerges from the cone, that part remains illuminated while
 In that case there is a partial
projected upon our satellite, a celestial witness to the spherical

Under certain conditions, then, the Moon can deprive us of the luminous
herself effaced in crossing our shadow.
anxieties it has engendered, this phenomenon is perfectly natural: the
as regards the safety of our planet.

terrifying ignorant mortals, either when the orb of light and life
covered with a veil of crape and woe, or took on a deep coppery hue.

been influenced by eclipses, sometimes for good, more often with
 The recital of these tragic stories would not
ignorance and superstition, and the power man gains from intellectual

Herodotus records that the Scythians, having some grievance against
of one of his children, whom they had murdered, at a banquet as rare
 The scoundrels who committed this atrocious crime took refuge at
them.
total eclipse of the Sun occurring just when the battle was imminent,
each to their own country.
May 28, 584 B.
, had been predicted by Thales.
Rochegrosse has painted a striking picture of the scene (Fig.

In the year 413 B.
 the Athenian General Nicias prepared to return to
 But, terrified by an eclipse of
his departure, and lost the chance of retreat.
him his life.
commencement of the decadence of Athens.

C.
near Arbela, and the great Macedonian Captain had need of all his

Agathocles, King of Syracuse, blocked by the Carthaginians in the port
second day of his flight by the arrival of a total eclipse of the Sun
 "What are you afraid of?" said he,
 "Are you alarmed at a shadow?"
March 2, 310.

 75.
by an Eclipse of the Sun.

struck terror into all hearts, an annular eclipse of the Sun occurring
intended to strangle the Pope at the altar.
youth of less than twenty, whose conduct is said to have been anything
 The assassins, terrified at the darkening of the Sun,
[15]
On March 1, 1504, a lunar eclipse saved the life of Christopher
 He was threatened with death by starvation in Jamaica, where
 Forewarned of
to deprive the Caribs of the light of the Moon--and kept his word.
eclipse had hardly begun when the terrified Indians flung themselves at

In all times and among all people we find traces of popular
 Here, the abnormal absence of the
betake themselves to prayer to ward off the divine anger.
cruelty of the dread dragon is to be averted: he must be chased away by
victim from his monstrous oppressor.

greatly disturbed our ancestors' peace of mind as to make them idiotic.
Preparations were made for assisting at an alarming phenomenon that
been preceded by a multitude of ill omens! Some expected a great
universal deluge, or, on the other hand, the conflagration of the world;
 To preserve
orders, numbers of frightened people shut themselves up in tightly
 The
village _curé_, being unable to hear the confessions of all his flock,
better world, was fain to tell them "there was no hurry, because the
penitents"!
[Illustration: FIG.
--Eclipse of the Moon at Laos (February 27,
]
These fears and terrors are still extant among ignorant peoples.
night of February 27, 1877, an eclipse of the Moon produced an
 In order
half-devoured orb, accompanying their volley with the most appalling
 Dr.
on p.

During the solar eclipse of March 15, 1877, an analogous scene occurred
with Russia, in order to shoot at the Sun, and deliver him from the

The lunar eclipse of December 16, 1880, was not unnoticed at Tackhent
saucepans, samovars and various implements struck together again and
Tchaitan who was devouring her.

is to reestablish the regularity of the celestial motions.
Emperor is regarded as the Son of Heaven, his government must in some

order, their appearance indicates some irregularity in the government of
 Accordingly, they are received with all kinds of
force to-day.

ancient epochs, the same awe and terror operates upon the ignorant

To return to astronomical realities.

the New Moon reached the line of intersection, known as the line of

the Sun at the end of eighteen years, eleven days, we have only to
that will occur in the future, and to find such as happened in the past.
This period was known to the Greeks under the name of the Metonic Cycle,
Saros.

can not be more than seven eclipses in one year, nor less than two.
there are only two, they are eclipses of the Sun.

fifty-eight seconds at the equator, and six minutes, ten seconds in the
 The Moon, on the contrary, may be entirely eclipsed

Eclipses of the Sun are very rare for a definite spot.
occurred for Paris during the whole of the nineteenth century, the last
22, 1724.
find that two will take place close to Paris, on April 17, 1912, at
Dourdan, but very brief: seven seconds), and August 11, 1999, at 10.
A.
 (total for Beauvais, Compiègne, Amiens, St.
two minutes, seventeen seconds).
August 12, 2026.
look for it.

The progress of the lunar shadow upon the surface of the Earth is traced
our satellite will dispense her ephemeral night.
the trajectory of the total phase of the 1900 eclipse in Portugal,

[Illustration: FIG.
--The path of the Eclipse of May 28, 1900.

author so impressively as during the observation of this grandiose
 With the absolute precision of astronomical calculations,
line drawn from the orb of day to our planet, and interposed itself
 The eclipse was total,
 Then the obscure
behind, and gradually and slowly completed its transit in front of him.
Here, to all observers, was a double philosophical lesson, a twofold
forces that govern the universe, and that of the inexorable valor of
travail of his feeble intelligence has arrived at the knowledge of the
space, through time, and through eternity.

30,000 inhabitants, not far from Alicante, and we had chosen this for

From the terrace of the country house of the hospitable Mayor, a farm
Pluvinel, there were no obstacles between ourselves and any part of the
 The whole horizon lay before us.
of Arab aspect framed in a lovely oasis of palm-trees; a little farther
other side a belt of low mountains, and near us fields and gardens.
Company of the Civic Guard kept order, and prevented the entrance of too

At the moment when the first contact of the lunar disk with the solar
the precise commencement of the occultation to the 40,000 persons who
exist between this telescopic observation and those made with the
improvised spectators.
in 1842.
and may be estimated at eight or ten seconds.
of the eclipse was confirmed almost as promptly for the eye as with the

The sky was splendidly clear; no cloud, no mist, deep blue; blazing Sun.
The first period of the eclipse showed nothing particular.
from the moment when more than half the solar disk is covered by the
 At this
visibility of the stars, and indicating the place of Venus in the sky
 Eight at once
 It should be said that the planet was at
blessed with good sight, it is always visible to the unaided eye.

flown back to the farm huddled into a corner, and made no further
 They told me that evening that the fowls had done the same a
and that the small children (who were very numerous at Elche, where the
back to their mothers' skirts.

in their strategics.

A few days before the eclipse I had prepared the inhabitants of this
description, which sums up the previous accounts of the astronomers:
"The spectacle of a total eclipse of the Sun is one of the most
 At the
Sun, eats into it gradually, and at last entirely covers it.
of the day lessens and is transformed.
all nature, the birds are hushed, the dog takes refuge with his master,
temperature falls, an appalling stillness is everywhere perceptible, as

the flame of spirits of wine and salt, a livid funereal light, the

"At the moment when the last line of the solar crescent disappears, we
luminous aureole shooting immense jets into space, with roseate flames

"A sudden night has fallen on us, a weird, wan night in which the
 The spectacle is
"
This impression was actually felt by us all, as may be seen from the
or immediately after:
"3.
M.
remarkable clearness from the horizon, and seeming to approach us.

55 P.
 Fall of temperature very apparent.
the atmosphere.

56 P.
 Profound silence through nature, which seems to participate
 Silence in all the groups.

57 P.
 Light considerably diminished, becoming wan, strange, and
 Landscape leaden gray, sea looks black.
light is not that of every day after the sunset.
tint of sadness spread over the whole of nature.
to it, and yet while we know that the occultation of the Sun by the Moon
uneasiness.
"
At this point we examined the effects of the solar light upon the seven
 In order to determine as accurately as possible
sheets, each painted boldly in the colors of the spectrum, violet,
of silk.
wife, as well as Countess de la Baume, were watching with me.
saw the first four disappear successively and entirely and turn black in
 The
remained visible.

evening--the contrary appears; violet remains visible after the red.

belongs to the least refrangible rays, to the greatest wave-lengths, to
 Such therefore is

This experiment completed, we turn back to the Sun.
spectacle! Totality has commenced, the Sun has disappeared, the black
corona of dazzling light.
with the difference that this can be observed with the naked eye,

This luminous coronal atmosphere entirely surrounds the solar disk, at a
diameter.

Beyond this corona is an aureole, of vaster glory but less luminous,
equatorial zone of the Sun, and of the belt of activity of the spots and

At the summit of the disk it is conical in shape.
and its right-hand portion ends in a point, not far from Mercury, which
expressly to give us the extent and direction of the solar aureole.

of the Moon), and what strikes me most is the distinction in light
be a brilliant silvery white, the former is grayer and certainly less

My impression is that there are _two solar envelopes of entirely
forming its atmosphere properly so-called, very luminous; the aureole
arising from eruptions, their form as a whole being possibly due to
natures.
the aerial envelope.

particularly in the equatorial zone, is sufficiently like that of the
corresponded with a minimum of solar energy.
close upon the minimum of the eleven-year period.
is, moreover, what all the astronomers were expecting.

 78.
observed from Elche (Spain).

varies with the activity of the Sun.
.

"But the total eclipse lasted a much shorter time than I have taken to
 The seventy-nine seconds of totality are over.
dazzling light bursts from the Sun, and tells that the Moon pursuing its
 The splendid sight is over.
shadow.

 Nothing beautiful lasts in
 Too sad! If only the celestial spectacle could have lasted
.
.


"The surprise, the oppression, the terror of some, the universal silence
 The Sun reappears in his splendor, and the life of nature

"While I was making my drawing, M.
Astronomical Society of France, who accompanied me to Spain for this
communication.

"The differential thermometers that I exposed to the Sun, hanging
five minutes.
1° to 20.
is 12.
2°--that is, 8.
 The temperature in

"The light received during totality was due: first, to the luminous
illuminated at forty kilometers (twenty-five miles) on the one side and
 It appeared to be inferior to that
 But, in
visible in the sky, whereas on a night of full moon, stars of second,
 We recognized, among others,
"
       *       *       *       *       *
From these notes, taken on the spot, it is evident that the
spectacles that can be admired upon our planet.

rapidly over the landscape.
was unable to verify this interesting observation.
Moon in effect took only eleven minutes (3.
M.
58 P.
) to
e.
distance of 766 kilometers (475 miles).
over the ground at a velocity of sixty-nine kilometers per minute, or
 It can

Some weeks previous to this fine eclipse, when I informed the Spaniards
all the interesting phenomena they might witness, including the effects
 Birds returned hurriedly to their
partridges were hypnotized, frogs croaked as if it were night, fowls
surprised by the sun, chicks gathered under their mothers' wing,
to their masters' feet, ants returned to the antheap, grasshoppers
silently back to their hive, and so on.

also signs of fear, surprise, even of terror, differing only "in degree"
eclipse by human beings unenlightened by a scientific education.

 The young King of Spain, Alfonso
readers (Fig.
me a few days after the eclipse.

 79.
King Alfonso XIII, at Madrid.

more especially to the elucidation of the grand problem of the physical
 We alluded to them in the chapter devoted to
 The last great total eclipses have been of immense value to

The eclipses of the Moon are less important, less interesting, than the
 Yet their aspect must not be neglected on this

Generally speaking, our satellite does not disappear entirely in the
our atmosphere, and curving inward, illumine the lunar globe with a rosy
 Sometimes, indeed, this refraction
atmosphere, and the Moon becomes invisible.
April 11, 1903.

eclipses of the Sun, because the cone of lunar shadow that produces the
globe (10, 20, 30, 50, 100 kilometers, according to the distance of the
above the horizon at the hour of the lunar eclipse are able to see it.
It is at all times a remarkable spectacle that uplifts our thoughts to
it.


CHAPTER XI
ON METHODS
HOW CELESTIAL DISTANCES ARE DETERMINED, AND HOW THE SUN IS WEIGHED

alarmed at the title of this Lesson, and that they do not employ some
 I even assume that if they have been good
Sun and Moon, and Stars, or of the weight of bodies at the surface of
problems.
the preceding statements by a brief summary of the methods employed for

The Sun seems to touch the Earth when it disappears in the purple mists
 The stars go hand in
inconceivable distance without a shiver.

without calculation we should never know the distance, which remains an

The best educated persons sometimes find it difficult to admit that
than those of certain points on our minute planet.
particular moment for us to give an exact account of the means employed

The calculation of these distances is made by "_triangulation_.
process is the same that surveyors use in the measurement of terrestrial
 There is nothing very alarming about it.
us a little at first, it is from its appearance only.

its apparent size is by measurement of the angle which it subtends

We all know that an object appears smaller, in proposition with its
 This diminution is not a matter of chance.
geometric, and proportional to the distance.
distance of 57 times its diameter measures an angle of 1 degree,
 Thus a sphere 1 meter in diameter measures
 A statue
80 meters (about 5 ft.
) will be equal to an angle of 1
60
 A sheet of paper, size 1 decimeter, seen at 5.
represents the same magnitude.

e.
from the circumference to the center.


circumference.
60 meters round, an angle of one degree is a
 Trace on a sheet of paper
360 meters round--an angle of 1 degree is a millimeter.

 80.
]
If the circumference of a circus measuring 180 meters be divided into
50 meters in width, then when the circus is
angle of 1 degree.
whether it be measured at 1 meter, 10 meters, 100 kilometers, or in the
 Whether a degree
 As
angle has been subdivided into 60 parts, to which the name of _minutes_
 Written
figure; the minute by an apostrophe ('), and the second by two (").
These minutes and seconds of _arc_ have no relation with the same terms
 These latter ought
though journalists nowadays set a somewhat pedantic example, by writing,
g.
 18' 30", instead of 4h.
 30s.

angle and the absolute measures, such, for instance, as the meter.
a degree may be measured on this page, while a second (the 3,600th part
kilometers.

more than half a degree.
know by that that it was 114 times the breadth of its disk away from us.
But it is a little less, since we have more than half a degree (31'),
110 times its diameter.

Moon by the measure of its diameter.
method.
 Let us continue.

orb of night.
the width in miles of the lunar disk.

 81.
degrees.


Moon simultaneously, from two stations situated on the same meridian,
 The distance that separates
two long sides come together on the Moon.

 82.
]
It is by this proceeding that the distance of our satellite was finally
Lacaille; the former observing at Berlin, the latter at the Cape of Good
 The result of their combined observations showed that the angle
is 57 minutes of arc (a little less than a degree).
_parallax_ of the Moon.

dispense with in discussing the distance of the stars.
term will soon become familiar in the course of the present lesson,
measurement of celestial distances.
in his _Astronomie des Dames_, "do not let us fear to use the term
explains a very simple and very familiar effect.

large, and prevents one from seeing the stage [written a hundred years
a parallax, a diversity of aspect, in virtue of which the hat appears to
actors.
in Africa and none for us, and that we see the Sun perfectly, because we
"
See how simple it is.
is removed from the Moon at a distance of about 60 times its
27).
in kilometers is only a step, because it suffices to multiply the
this number.
kilometers, multiplied by 60.
miles).
distance of our planet, but also permits us to calculate its real volume
 As the diameter of the Moon seen
from the Moon is 114', the real diameter of the orb of night must be to
 That is a
diameter of our planet being 12,742 kilometers (7,900 miles).

with greater precision than that employed in the ordinary measurements

that the distance separating the Earth from the Moon is measured with
Marseilles, or the weight of a pound of sugar at the grocer's.
may add without comment, that the astronomers are incomparably more
shop-keepers.

and its diameter directly, we should have arrived at no greater
which in itself is the most insurmountable of all the problems.

might say that it traces the limits of our domain in space.
distance of 384,000 kilometers (238,000 miles) separates the planet from
 This space is insignificant in the immeasurable distances
are confounded in one tiny star; but for the inhabitants of our globe,
 Let us try,

A cannon-ball at constant speed of 500 meters (547 yards) per second
 A train started at a
uninterrupted journey in 384,000 minutes, or 6,400 hours, or 266 days,
 And in less than the time it takes to write the name of the
in one and a quarter seconds.

have journeyed a greater distance.

us.
the same method has been employed.

calculating the distance of the Sun, 388 times farther from us than the
planet.
of the Earth for its base: the two ideal lines drawn from the
the Sun; there would be no triangle, and the measurement would be

In order to measure the distance which separates the Earth from the Sun,
inside the terrestrial orbit.
motion with that of the Star of the Morning and Evening, the capricious
113-1/2 years less 8 years, 8 years, 113-1/2 years plus 8 years.

June, 1769.
e.
105-1/2 years after the preceding, in December, 1874; the next in
 The next will be in June, 2004, and June, 2012.
eagerly anticipated epochs, astronomers watch the transit of Venus
from each other, marking the two points at which the planet, seen from
the solar disk.
lines, which starting from two diametrically opposite points of the
 Venus
respectively, upon the Earth and on the Sun.
angle gives what is called the parallax of the Sun--that is, the angular

[Illustration: FIG.
--Measurement of the distance of the Sun.

the Sun measures 8.
 Now, we know that an object presenting an angle

The same object, if it subtends an angle of a minute, or the sixtieth
60 times more distant, _i.
_, 3,438 times.

minute, is at a distance of 206,265 times its length.

206,265/8.
149,000,000 kilometers (93,000,000 miles).
precise and certain as that of the Moon.

the result of which indicates to us with absolute certainty the distance
day and the gentle illumination of our nights.

whose results agree perfectly with the preceding.
based on the velocity of light.
instantaneous, and notwithstanding the extreme rapidity of its
point to another.
300,000 kilometers (186,000 miles) per second.
the Earth, it requires thirty to forty minutes, according to the
 Now, in examining the eclipses of Jupiter's
minutes, 34 seconds in the moment of their occurrence, according as
Earth, at the minimum and maximum distance.
minutes, 34 seconds to traverse the terrestrial orbit, it must take less
which is situated at the center.
distance of the Sun is easily found by multiplying 300,000 by 8 minutes,
(93,000,000 miles).

confirmatory result.
ourselves exposed to a vertical rain; the degree of inclination of our
drops of rain.
umbrella in order not to meet the drops of water.
occurs for light.
upon the Heavens.
reach us directly.
speed, and in our astronomical observations we are forced to follow its
advance.
is the result of the combined effects of the velocity of light and of
 It shows that the speed of our globe is equivalent
e.
second.
along an orbit which she traverses at a speed of 30 kilometers (better
kilometers per hour, or 2,592,000 kilometers per day, or 946,080,000
 This is the length of the

The length of orbit being thus discovered, one can calculate its

We may cite one last method, whose data, based upon attraction, are
 The Moon is a little disturbed
powerful Sun.
distance, the distance may be determined by analyzing the effect it has

Other means, on which we will not enlarge in this summary of the methods
measurements with certainty.
at some length upon the distance of the orb of day, since this
valuation of all stellar distances, and may be considered as the meter

This radiant Sun to which we owe so much is therefore enthroned in space

upon us to such a manifest extent, it being the very condition of our
than ourselves from the solar focus.

larger than the Moon, which is only 384,000 kilometers (238,000 miles)
orb.

 Yet,
already done for the Moon, we may attempt to picture this abyss.
train cited just now would, if started at a speed of a kilometer a
and taking as long to return to the Earth the total would be 566 years.
Fourteen generations of stokers would be employed on this celestial
expedition to us.

feet) per second.
explosion sufficiently formidable to be heard here would only reach us
 But the more rapid carriers, such as
seconds.

across which we see our dazzling Sun, whose burning rays fly rapidly

       *       *       *       *       *
And now let us see how the distances of the planets were determined.

to be employed is quite different, but equally precise in its results.

longer in proportion as the distance is greater, and the orbit that has
 This is simple.
that there is a geometric proportion in the relations between the
 This
and embodied in the following formula:
"The squares of the times of revolution of the planets round the Sun
distances from the Sun.

 And yet, if we unravel this

What is a square? We all know this much; it is taught to children of ten
 But lest it has slipped your memory: a square is simply a

Thus: 2 × 2 = 4; 4 is the square of 2.


And so on, indefinitely.

 It is a number multiplied

For instance: 2 multiplied by 2 and again by 2 equals 8.
cube of 2.

Now let us take an example that will show the simplicity and precision
 Let us choose a planet, no matter
 Say, Jupiter, the giant of the worlds.
planetary group.
2) as

Multiply this number twice by itself 5.
2 × 5.

On the other hand, the revolution of Jupiter takes almost twelve years
85).
 The square of
85 is equal to the cube of the number 5.
 This very

Thus, to find the distance of a planet, it is sufficient to observe the
by multiplying it into itself.
simultaneously the cube of the number that represents the distance.

multiply it by 149,000,000 (in miles 93,000,000), the key to the system

Nothing, then, could be less complicated than the definition of these
 A few moments of attention reveal to us in their majestic
the Heavens.


 We have yet
radiant Sun.

these heights, to rise on the wings of genius to these distant suns,
celestial kingdoms.

 And the
distances of the stars.

kilometers (93,000,000 miles), describes a circumference, or rather an
over in a year.
the diametrically opposite point which it passes six months later is
e.
orbit.
familiar) serves as the base of a triangle of which the apex is a star.

in observing the little luminous point persistently for a whole year, to
reproducing in perspective the annual revolution of the Earth.

impossible to gage the distance, and our 298,000,000 kilometers have no
 If, on the contrary, it is displaced,
reflection, the perspective in miniature, of the revolution of our

The annual parallax of a star is the angle under which one would see the
 This radius
observed, the unit, the meter of celestial measures.
course smaller in proportion as the star is more distant, and the
 But the
is almost imperceptible, and very exact instruments are required for its

[Illustration: FIG.
--Small apparent ellipses described by the stars
]
The researches of the astronomers have proved that there is not one star
 The minuteness of
the distance of the stars, will be appreciated from the fact that the
corresponding with it could be covered by a spider's thread.

206,265 times its diameter; to a millimeter seen at 206 meters'
distance (more invisible to the naked eye).
excess of those actually obtained.
of the nearest star is calculated at 75/100 of a second (0.
e.
from this star, [alpha] of Centaur, the half-diameter of the terrestrial
 Now in order that the
appear to subtend no more than an angle of 0.
a distance 275,000 times its length.
orbit is 149,000,000 kilometers (93,000,000 miles), the distance which
41,000,000,000,000 kilometers (25,000,000,000,000 miles).
the nearest star.
hemisphere.
of Cygnus, which floats in the Heavens 68,000,000,000,000 kilometers
 This little star, of fifth
Bessel, 1837-1840).

infinity.

them we must again measure space by time.

[alpha] of Centaur, _light_, the most rapid of all couriers, takes 4
 If we would follow it, we must not jump from start to
must take the trouble to think out the direct advance of the ray of
 We must see it
the journey; then 300,000 more in the second, which makes 600,000
on without stopping for four years and four months.
trouble we may realize the value of the figure; otherwise, as this
no significance for us, and will be a dead letter.

flight of 340 meters (1,115 feet) per second were able to cross the
reach us in 3,000,000 years.

have to run for 46,000,000 years, in order to reach this star, our

The distance of some thirty of the stars has been determined, but the

The dazzling Sirius reigns 92,000,000,000,000 kilometers
 Each
with such luminosity.

 On all sides they
while in space before it encounters the Earth.
receive to-day from some pale star hardly perceptible to our eyes--so
sun that expired thousands of years ago.


interested perhaps in knowing the means employed in weighing the worlds.
The process is as simple and as clear as those of which we have been

_Weighing the stars!_ Such a pretension seems Utopian, and one asks
in order to calculate the weight of Sun, Moon, planets or stars.

 Ladies proverbially dislike figures: yet
of her pen, by writing down a few columns of figures with a little care,
kilos, by direct methods.

occupation.

Heavens along an indefinite straight line, escaping at the tangent.
in virtue of the attraction that governs the movements of all the
half-diameter revolves round us in 27 days, 7 hours, 43 minutes, 11-1/2
and describing an almost circular orbit in space.
trace an arc of the lunar orbit, and if a tangent is taken to this arc,
planet is found to be 1-1/3 millimeter per second.

during which she accomplishes 1,017 meters of her orbit.

another body of a more powerful mass.

because they are constantly attracted to it by an irresistible force.


On the other hand, it can be determined that if an object is left to
90 meters during the

We also know that attraction diminishes with the square of the distance,
abandon it to the attraction of our planet, it would in the first second
90 meters divided by the square of 60, or 3,600--that is, of
the straight line she would pursue if the Earth were not influencing

The reasoning just stated for the Moon is equally applicable to the Sun.

 In
diminished at such a distance, we should look, in the first place, for
multiplied by itself, = 546,905,000.
90 meters, which
9/1000000 of a millimeter, and we see that at the distance of the Sun,

Now let us do for our planet what we did for its satellite.
the annual orbit of the terrestrial globe round the central orb, and we
9 millimeters toward

This proportion gives the attractive force of the Sun in relation to
powerful than our world, for 2.
000,009 equals
the sake of simplicity.


Their mass is estimated by the movement of a satellite round them, and
times heavier than the Earth, Saturn 92 times, Neptune 16 times, Uranus
two-thirds that of our own.

perturbations which they cause in other stars, or in the imprudent
 Mercury weighs very much
 So the beautiful
and there is no great difference between her weight and our own.

has been calculated by reckoning the amount of water she attracts at
the terrestrial globe.
she makes us travel faster, whereas in the first quarter, when she is

All the calculations agree in showing us that the orb of night is 81
 There is nearly as much difference in

       *       *       *       *       *
Not content with weighing the planets of our system, astronomers have
 How have they been enabled to
Suns--incandescent globes of fire scattered in the depths of space?
They have resorted to the same method, and it is by the study of the
star, that the weight of a few of these has been calculated.

the distance is known.

see twinkling in the depths of the azure sky are enormous suns, larger
Earth.


incessantly renewed, and perpetually transformed by the accumulated

And what diversity exists in this army of worlds and suns, whose regular
.
.

worlds, and I see signs of impatience in my readers, for after so much
explanation that will prove to them that a kilogram transported to

Give me your attention five minutes longer, and I will restore your

It must not be supposed that objects at the surface of a world like
 That
 In that case we should have to assume that a
times more, or 324,000 kilograms.
were of the same dimensions as the Earth.
only of the divine Sun, we know that he is 108 times larger than our

Now, weight at the surface of a celestial body depends not only on its

In order to know the weight of any body upon the surface of the Sun, we

from its center than it is upon a globe of the dimensions of the Earth,
the distance, the intensity of the weight would there be 108 multiplied
 Now divide the number representing the
e.
at the surface of the Sun are 28 times heavier than here.
weight was 60 kilos would weigh 1,680 kilograms there if organized in
at each step she would lift up a shoe that weighed at least ten

This reasoning as just stated for the Sun may be applied to the other
 We know that on the surface of Jupiter the intensity of weight is
37/100.

here.

With deference to the Selenites, everything is at its lightest on the
12 kilos there.

that one can not choose one's planet with the same facility as one's
And now, while thanking my readers for having followed me so far in this
philosophical impression has been produced on their minds by these
the pageant of the Heavens? When your imagination was borne away to
systems disseminated through a boundless eternity, did you ask what
effects resulted from these forces, radiations, energies? Did you
activity so prodigious and so varied must needs have spread the waves of
immensities of the Universe? Have you felt that all can not be dead and
and of our isolation to believe in the silence of the night: that on the
of the positions and movements of the stars, is to enable us to
physical constitution, their degree of life and intellectuality in the

Thought that we seek again in these starry constellations strewn to

The humble little planet that we inhabit presents itself to us as a
 Life is everywhere.
bottom of the seas, from the valleys to the mountains, from the
from the air we breathe, arises an immense, prodigious, and perpetual
 Listen! it is the great voice of Nature, the sum of all the
ocean waves, from the forest winds, from the 300,000 kinds of insects
surface of our globe.
agile creatures.
of 130,000 bacteria.
meadow, we find the earthworms working to produce assimilable slime.
we lift a stone in the path, we discover a crawling population.
gather a flower, detach a leaf, we everywhere find little insects living
 Swarms of midges fly in the sun, the trees of the
play, the lizards dart away at our approach, we trample down the
 Life enwraps us in an inexorable
perpetuating itself to its own detriment, as imposed upon it by an
 And this from all time, for the very stones of
that one gram of such stone will often contain millions of shells,
 The infinitely little is equal to the

Life appears to us as a fatal law, an imperious force which all obey, as
 This is illustrated
 We must be
 On what
has received no privileges from Nature, is the exception; and that the
solitude, and death?
We have a tendency to imagine that Life can not exist under conditions
on the condition of being similar to our own.
itself demonstrates to us the error of this way of thinking.
the water: fishes die out of the water.
affirm categorically that Life is impossible at the bottom of the sea:
would burst any organism; 3, because all motion would be impossible
 Some inquisitive person sends down a dredge, and
touch must proceed with circumspection.
depths: they make it with their own phosphorescence.
visit subterranean caverns, and discover animals and plants whose organs

What right have we to say to the vital energy that radiates round every
name of Science? An absolute mistake.
island in the midst of the vast ocean of the Unknown.
which seemed to be a barrier are, as we have seen, peopled with special
 Some one objects: But after all, there is air there, there is
world of death, an eternally sterile desert.
yet come across beings that can breathe without air, and live without
 Even if we did not know of any, it would not
 But as it happens, we do know of such: the
 These beings live without air, without oxygen.
oxygen kills them!
All the evidence goes to show that in interpreting as we ought the
Science, we should enlarge the circle of our conceptions and our
image of what is in existence here below.
due to local causes upon our planet.
and of the atmosphere, temperature, light, density, weight, are so many
 Our flesh is composed of
and of some other elements, among which we may instance sodium chloride
 The flesh of animals is not chemically different from our own.
All this comes from the water and the air, and returns to them again.
The same elements, in very minute quantities, make up all living bodies.
The ox that browses on the grass is formed of the same flesh as the man
 All organized terrestrial matter is only carbon

But we have no right to forbid Nature to act differently in worlds from
 A world, for example, in which silica replaces
absolutely different from those which exist on the Earth, different not
 We already know stars and suns for
g.
and Deneb.
find hydrochloric acid, and all the fecund family of chlorides, playing
 Might not bromine be
terrestrial chemistry? What is to prove that these elements are really
compounds? Their equivalents are multiples of the first: 1, 6, 8, 14,
 And is even hydrogen the most simple of the elements? Is not its
primitive atom, whose geometric arrangement and various associations

certain planets.
of the action of an unknown substance that manifests itself by a marked
 This gas, which does not exist upon the
Uranus.
its water vapor, to have no sort of analogy with our own.
solar spectrum itself, many of the lines have not yet been identified

The interrelation of the planets is of course incontrovertible, since
 But they differ among
density, temperature, atmosphere, but again in physical and chemical
 And the point we would now accent is that this diversity
but, on the contrary, as a new field open to the infinite fecundity of

When our thoughts take wing, not only to our neighbors, Moon, Venus,
worlds that gravitate round the suns disseminated in space, we have no
worlds of Heaven resemble us in any way, whether in form, or even in

The substance of the terrestrial human body is due to the elements of
 The terrestrial human form derives
by the continuous progress of the transformation of species.
seems obvious that we are man or woman, because we have a head, a heart,
 Nothing is less a matter of
 That we are constituted as we are, is simply the result of our
arms--less elegant than your own, it is true, Madam, but still of the
 And more and more, by the progress of paleontology, we are
 As certain as it is that the bird
is it that terrestrial Humanity represents the topmost branches of the
roots of which are plunged into the very rudiments of the most

The multitude of worlds is surely peopled by every imaginable and
 Terrestrial man is endowed with five senses, or
 Why should Nature stop at this point?
electrical sense, a magnetic sense, a sense of orientation, an organ
ultra-violet, or permitted them to hear at a distance, or to see through
digestive tube: may there not be worlds in which a nutritive atmosphere
The least sparrow, even the dusky bat, has an advantage over us in that
 Think how inferior are our conditions, since
soil like any vulgar caterpillar before its metamorphosis! Would it be a
a world of scented luxury, full of animated flowers; a world where the
different colors--the diamond glowing with the ruby, or the emerald with
in the glory of an eternal spring; with multi-colored moons sleeping in
inhabitants,--men, women, or perhaps of other sexes,--perfect in their
incombustible as asbestos, perhaps immortal, unless they commit suicide
convinced that our imagination is but sterility, in the midst of an

One important point seems always to be ignored expressly by those who
 It is that this
any other.
 Eternity
 There is no reason why the other

What, indeed, is the Present Moment? It is an open trap through which

The immensity of Heaven bears in its bosom cradles as well as tombs,
 It abounds in extinct suns, and
 In all probability Jupiter is not yet inhabited.
this prove? The Earth was not inhabited during its primordial period:
perhaps observing it at that epoch, a few million years ago?
To pretend that our globe must be the only inhabited world because the
we remarked before, like a fish.
that it is impossible to live out of water, since its outlook and its
 There is no answer to
extension of the too narrow horizon of habitual ideas.

"positive" science, founded upon our senses only, is altogether
 We

As to the planetary systems other than our own, we are no longer reduced
 We already know with certainty that our Sun is no


It is surely an exceptional situation that, given a sidereal system
him, the plane of such a system should fall just within our line of
which it is composed pass exactly between this sun and ourselves in
 As,
the existence of these unknown planets (save indeed from perturbation,
hope for like conditions in order to discover solar systems other than
 But these exceptional circumstances have reproduced themselves

Thus, for instance, we have seen that the variable star Algol owes its
magnitude every sixty-nine hours, to the interposition of a body between
determine accurately the orbit of this body, its dimensions and its
 Here, then, is a system
effected in sixty-nine hours with extreme rapidity, as measured by the

The star [delta] of Cepheus is in the same case: it is an orb eclipsed
plane of our vision.
system, and observation has already revealed a great number of others.

have been revealed, as it were in section, to terrestrial observation,
quantity of solar systems scattered through the immensities of space,

On the other hand, analysis of the motions of several stars, such as
companions,--planets not yet discovered by the telescope, and that
the radiation of the star.


conditions of the environment differ too much from terrestrial

This hypothesis is purely gratuitous, and we will now discuss it.

ladder of time for a moment, to follow the evolutions of Nature.

 Our planet, the future

At last it came to birth, this cherished Earth, a gaseous, luminous
 Millions of years
sufficiently transformed to permit life to manifest itself in its most

The first organic forms of the protoplasm, the first aggregations of
mussels of the still warm seas, were succeeded by the fishes, then by
occupies the top of the genealogical tree, and crowns the animal

Humanity is comparatively young upon the Earth.
thousands of centuries of existence to it .
.
reason!
The terrestrial organisms, from the lowest up to man, are the resultant
 The earliest seem
nitrogen; they were, so to speak, without animation, save for some very
us a notion of these primitive beings.
waters of the primary epoch.
islands emerging from the level of the universal ocean, there were no
 The first aquatic creatures were succeeded
 Later on were developed the mammals and

What, again, do we not owe to the plant-world of the primary epoch, of
good nutritious soil of to-day, in which the roses flourish, and the

under the roughest forms, and in the most varied conditions.
long-period comet passing in sight of the Earth from time to time would
accordance with a slow evolution, corresponding to the variation of the
goal of nature, Progress is the supreme law.

metamorphoses.
of orbs arrested in their development.

substances of which they are composed, the environment in which they
the seasons, etc.
world.

Earth and Neptune, utterly different from the point of view of distance
structures could have followed a parallel development on these planets.
The average temperature must be much lower on Neptune than on the Earth,
 The years and seasons there
as weak, and weight is, on the contrary, a little greater.
conditions so different from our own, the activities of Nature would
 And doubtless the

same there as here.
developed here from the rudimentary organ of the trilobite to the
Neptune than in our dazzling solar luminosity, in order to perceive
 In all probability, it is
 The lungs, functioning there in
 So, too, for the stomach
 Corporeal forms, animal and human, can not

Certain _savants_ contend that if the conditions differed too much from
 Yet we
sphere of observation, and to pretend that our planet and our Humanity
 That is a hypothesis as ridiculous as it

Do not let us be "personal," like children, and old people who never see
 Let us learn to live in the Infinite and the Eternal.

is the complement and the natural crown of Astronomy.
most in the study of the Universe is surely to know what goes on there.


a planet is not its skeleton but the life that vibrates upon its

And again, if we analyze things, we see that for the Procession of

What has become of our ancestors, the millions of human beings who
them? Search everywhere.
water, dust, atoms of hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, carbon, etc.
are incorporated in turn in the organism of every living being.

the catacombs.
thousandth time near the Church of St.
obliged to turn out of the direct way, on account of excavations.
looked down, and saw that immediately below the pavement, they had just
reposed there for ten centuries.
trampled them unwittingly under foot.
the same in every quarter of Paris.
a coin with the effigy of Nero were found in a garden near the

And from the most general standpoint of Life, the whole world is in the
lives, is formed of elements that have already been incorporated in
 The roses that adorn the bosom of the
.
 but I will not enlarge upon this topic.

formed? Where have the elements you absorb to-day in respiration and
subject to? Think away from it: do not insist on this point: on no
.
.

demonstration of the ideal; since what exists is you, is all of us, is
and even less so, since its particles only pass rapidly through the
 A heap of stones does not make a house.
Quintillions of tons of materials would not represent the Earth or any

Yes, what really exists, what constitutes a complete orb, is the city of
 Let us recognize that the flower of life flourishes on the surface
life that we see and admire,--of which we form part,--and which is the
back again, in the web of living beings,--and the reality, the goal, is

Yes, matter passes, and being also, after sharing in the concerted

And indeed everything passes rapidly!
What irrepressible grief, what deep melancholy, what ineffaceable
friends fallen upon the road one after the other, above all when we
that witnessed our first start in terrestrial existence, our first
eternal--when we wander over those fields and valleys and hills, when
image is so intimately linked with our first impressions.
this fireside the grandfather danced us on his knee, and told us
comfortably tucked in, and not likely to fall out of the big bed; in
nets for birds; in this stream we fished for crayfish; there on the path
these slopes we found rare stones and fossils, and mysterious
of the stars, the form of the constellations.
think, to love, to form attachments, to dream, to question every
 And now, where is
knew in infancy? where are our dreams of childhood? Winged thoughts
 People, caresses,
 The cemetery has closed over them
 There is a silent void.
illusion? Was it only to weep one day over this negation that our
there nothing, down the long length of human history, but eternal

greatest problems.
conditions of Thought.

theater, and Astronomy itself, sublime science, a vain research.
that this is the truth, veiled as yet to actual science, and that human
 Yes,

But we would fain go a little further in our knowledge of the universe,
 We would know
mysterious cords, if our life, which will assuredly be extinguished at
of Eternity.

 Millions of
 Air, water, smoke,
 _Memento, homo, quia pulvis es et in pulverem revertebis.
Remember oh man! that dust thou art, and unto dust thou shalt return,
after the carnival.

 It goes where the corpse of Cæsar went an
 Nor will there be more remains of
 And the whole of Humanity, and the Earth itself, will also
 Let no one talk of the Progress of Humanity as an

If the soul were also to disappear in smoke, what would be left of the

On this hypothesis, _all_ would be reduced to _nothing_.

limited, but this reason and these faculties suffice none the less to
we reject it as incompatible with the sublime grandeur of the spectacle

Undoubtedly, Creation does not seem to concern itself with us.
proceeds on its inexorable course without consulting our sensations.
With the poet we regret the implacable serenity of Nature, opposing the
despair.

            Nature au front serein, comme vous oubliez!
            Les fils mystérieux où nos coeurs sont liés.

            Nous y sommes venus, d'autres vont y venir,
            Ils le continueront sans pouvoir le finir.

            Les pires des humains sont comme les meilleurs;
            Tout commence en ce monde et tout finit ailleurs.

            O Nature, abritée en ce désert si beau,
            Que donne aux morts pensifs la forme du tombeau,
          Est-ce que vous serez à ce point insensible,
          Et de continuer votre fête paisible

--Free Translation.

     Nature, too soon you will forget!.
.
     ruthlessly snapping the cords that bind our hearts together!
     Others will pass where we pass; we have arrived, and others will
     pursued by theirs .
.

     For no one here begins or finishes: the worst are as the best of
     in this world, and end otherwhere.

     splendid desert, when we are both asleep, and cast by the tomb into

     Will you to the last verge be so insensible, that, knowing us lost,
     smile, and sing always?
Yes, mortals may say that when they are sleeping in the grave, spring
themselves if they will meet again some day, in another sphere; but do
short of absolute and final nonentity for everything, they must be
instinctively since the first origins of Humanity?
As our planet is only a province of the Infinite Heavens, so our actual
 Astronomy, by giving us
 The specter of death has
 The beams of every star shed a ray of hope
 On each sphere Nature chants the pæan of Life Eternal.


 ACCURATE MEASUREMENT.
exact science, and at the very beginning of his study in astronomy the

should seek to attain the most accurate results of which his instruments
 The ordinary affairs of life furnish abundant
of a board in inches or the weight of a load of coal in pounds and
but of far greater astronomical importance than these are the
 A kitchen clock or a
day," but it may be used to time a horse or a bicycler upon a race
required for covering the length of the course.
in both of these ways--to tell the time at which something happens or is
using a clock for either purpose the student should learn to take the
or to a small fraction of a minute, by estimating the position of the
 Estimate the fraction

EXERCISE 1.
sharply upon a desk with a pencil and let each of the others note the
observations as follows:
student, and second and third the record made by another.
observations have been made and recorded they should be brought together
each tap, as is shown in the last column.
faster one watch is than the other, and the agreement or disagreement of
 Keep
precision.

 ANGLES AND THEIR USE.
difference of direction between two lines that cross each other.
twelve o'clock the hour and minute hand of a watch point in the same
 At one o'clock the minute
of the circumference of the dial, and the angle between the hands is one
 It is customary to imagine the circumference
 e.
an ordinary dial to be subdivided into six equal parts, each of which
how many of these degrees are included in the opening between its sides.
At one o'clock the angle between the hands of a watch is thirty degrees,
180°, etc.

 How? But a more convenient
 1, applied to the
scale can be read.

this book, for the numerous exercises which are to follow.

 1.
]
EXERCISE 2.
long, measure each of its angles and take their sum.
be the shape of the triangle, this sum should be very nearly
be attained and one of the first lessons to be learned in any science
work some minute error will cling to it and our results can be only
 This, however, should not be taken as an excuse
that the unavoidable errors may be made as small as possible.
present case the measured angles may be improved a little by adding
sum falls short of 180°, as in the following example:
            Measured angles.
This process is in very common use among astronomers, and is called

[Illustration: FIG.
--Triangulation.

 TRIANGLES.
of angles are usually provided with a telescope, which may be pointed at
measure the angle through which the telescope is turned in passing from
 In this way it is possible to measure the angle
two church steeples or the sun and moon, and this is usually called the
 By measuring angles in this way it is
Fig.
 A surveyor at _A_ desires to know the distance to _C_, on the
 He measures with a tape
then, with a suitable instrument, measures the angle at _A_ between the
A C_ = 73.
3°.
upon paper a line 100 millimeters long, and marks the ends _a_ and _b_;
4°, and at
3°, and marks by _c_ the point where the two
 With the millimeter scale he now measures the
2 millimeters, which determines the distance _A C_
2 yards, since the triangle on paper has been
correspond to yards on the other.
upon which this depends? The measured distance _A B_ in the surveyor's

EXERCISE 3.
the angles necessary to determine the length of the schoolroom.
the length has been thus found, measure it directly with the foot rule
 If
expect the results to agree.

 3.
]
In the same manner, by sighting at the moon from widely different parts
 3, the moon's distance from us is found to be
 What is the base line in this case?
4.
--In their observations astronomers and
flat and level surface, such as that of a smooth pond, may be regarded
 A very common observation
altitude," and consists in measuring the angle between the sun's rays
 This angle between a
lines, but is really the same thing, since it means the angle between
point directly under the sun.
the geographies, "The latitude of a point on the earth's surface is its
latitude is the angle between the plane of the equator and a line drawn

A convenient method of obtaining a part of the plane of the horizon for
a table in the sunshine.
pour a little more water upon it near the center.
toward one side, thrust the edge of a thin wooden wedge under this side
than another; it is then level and a part of the plane of the horizon.
Get several wedges ready before commencing the experiment.
have been properly placed, drive a pin or tack behind each one so that

5.
 EXERCISE 4.
centimeters, or more, square, planed smooth on one face and one edge.
Drive a pin perpendicularly into the face of the board, near the middle
 Set the board on edge on the horizon plane and turn
plane.
its shadow shall fall exactly upon the shadow of the first pin, and with

opposite edge is directed toward the sun and set a third pin just as the
 Remove the pins and draw
 4, and with
 The student who has
mean of the two recorded times the sun's altitude was equal to one half

[Illustration: FIG.
--Taking the sun's altitude.

as thin as possible, rule a pencil line alongside it on the horizon
 The angle which this line makes with a line pointing due south is
 When the sun is south, its azimuth is zero;

EXERCISE 5.
during both the morning and afternoon session and note the time of each
 Verify the setting of the plane of
in it.

 GRAPHICAL REPRESENTATIONS.
observations, similar to Fig.
_g_ to _g_, _e_ to _e_, _d_ to _d_, drawn parallel to _B B_, the time at
 In Fig.
intersection of _M M_ with _B B_ that this time was 11h.

The method of graphs which is here introduced is of great importance in
 5
short, provided only the intervals between consecutive hours 9 to 10, 10
, are equal.
from _B B_ is taken proportional to the sun's altitude, and may be upon
 g.
scale is used for all observations.
over that part of the base line which corresponds to the time at which
 Square ruled paper is very convenient, although
 It is especially to be noted that from
has been drawn through the circles which represent the sun's altitude,
A.
 and 3 P.
 In Fig.
 What was

 5.
]
7.
--By sighting over a protractor, measure
a window.
the experiment, to see how much the angle changes.
measured is called "the angle subtended" by the window at the place
 If this place was squarely in front of
lay off from the vertex along its sides a distance proportional to the
 g.
distance.
its length will be proportional to the width of the window, and the
length of the cross line.

subtended by the moon may in an entirely similar manner find the moon's
 Can the same


CHAPTER II
THE STARS AND THEIR DIURNAL MOTION

 THE STARS.
frequently as possible, the student should practice watching the stars
movements.
north, and compare the stars which he sees in that part of the sky with

match the brighter ones in the sky.
such conspicuous constellations as the Big Dipper (Ursa Major), the
 These three constellations

_The names of the stars.
the names of the more important constellations and the names of the
 These names are for the most
the constellation.
book.

 MAGNITUDES OF THE STARS.
 Paul
apt words can be found to mark the difference of brightness which the
 Even prior to St.
astronomers had divided the stars in respect of brightness into six
_magnitude_.
first magnitude, the great mass of faint ones which are just visible to
degrees of brilliancy are represented by the intermediate magnitudes,
 The student must not be misled by the
 It has no reference to the size of the stars, but only
smaller circles by which the stars are represented indicate only the
 Following
principal stars and constellations, learn also to recognize how bright

10.
--Find on the map and in the sky the stars
 What geometrical
α Ursæ Minoris is frequently called by the special name Polaris, or
 Why are the other two stars called "the Pointers"? What

--Stand in such a position that Polaris is just hidden behind
key map as accurately as possible the position of this line with respect
to the left of it.
this observation was made.
at the same place, draw the line and note the time, and you will find

line the Pointers are now in a different direction from Polaris.
Measure with a protractor the angle between the two lines drawn in the
find how many degrees per hour this direction is changing.
about 15° per hour.
first recorded time, what would be the position of the vertical line
the observation on the next clear night, and allowing for the number of
determine from the time interval a more accurate value of the rate at

The motion of the stars which the student has here detected is called
 What is the significance of the word diurnal?
In the preceding paragraph there is introduced a method of great
 e.
this case the rate per hour, from observations separated by a long
found from a short interval.
rate at which the planet Mars rotates about its axis, astronomers use
which the planet made more than 75,000 revolutions upon its axis.
were to write out in algebraic form an equation for determining the
75,000, would appear in the equation as a divisor, and in the final
employed.

back to the same position at the same hour and minute every night.

 6.
]
[Illustration: FIG.
 The plumb-line apparatus.

 THE PLUMB-LINE APPARATUS.
conveniently and accurately made with no other apparatus than a plumb
 In Figs.
shown a simple form of such apparatus, consisting essentially of a board
that pass through it.
which is nailed in vertical position another board 5 or 6 feet long to
 This consists of a wire or fish line with any
 g.
immersed in a vessel of water placed inside the box, so as to check any
 In the cover of the box is a small hole
baseboard the apparatus may be readily leveled, so that the wire shall
box.
whole apparatus.
the upright, as in Fig.
Fig.
passes through the plane determined by the plumb line and the center of

The whole apparatus may be constructed by any person of ordinary
should be provided for every class beginning observational astronomy.
use the apparatus for the experiment of § 10, it should be leveled, and
 7, should be turned
behind the wire.
 The
stars which he desires to observe, and to note by his watch the time at
 It will be seen that the wire takes the
screw eyes is introduced solely to keep the observer in the right place

12.
--Clocks are sometimes so made and regulated that
the same place, and such a timepiece is called a sidereal clock--i.
,
 Would such a clock gain or lose in comparison with an
by moving the regulator?
[Illustration: FIG.
--Photographing the circumpolar stars.
]
13.
--EXERCISE 7.
camera.
focused, at Polaris, and expose a plate for three or four hours.
developing the plate you should find a series of circular trails such as
 8, only longer.
star moving slowly over the plate, in consequence of its changing
 The center indicated by these curved trails is
 It is that part of the sky toward which
stars around the center is only an apparent motion due to the rotation
axis while the stars stand still, just as trees and fences and telegraph
appear to be in rapid motion.
concerned, there is no method by which the pupil can tell for himself
following the custom of astronomers, we shall habitually speak as if it
 How long was the plate exposed in
 8?
14.
--On Plate I, opposite page 124, the pole of the
near the center of Fig.
 See if you can identify
 The

Find from the map and locate in the sky the two bright stars Capella and
it.
on every clear night, and all night?
Observe other bright stars farther from Polaris than are Vega and
 Do they move like the sun and moon? Do

far from it?
How long does it take the fastest moving stars to make the circuit of
stars?
15.
--A study of the sky along the lines
of it surrounding the pole whose stars are visible on every clear night.
The same star is sometimes high in the sky, sometimes low, sometimes to
the horizon.
 A little farther
dips for a time below the horizon and is lost to view, and the farther
the case of stars 90° away from the pole, we find them hidden below the
 9).
is such a star, and in its rising and setting acts precisely as does
find later, each star keeps always at (nearly) the same distance from
from the pole very greatly, and thus changes the amount of time it
of summer and the short ones of winter.

 9.
]
How much time do stars which are more than 90° from the pole spend above

strictly true only at the time when it is 90° distant from the
 e.
 At other seasons it rises north or
than 90°, and the same is true for the stars.

 THE GEOGRAPHY OF THE SKY.
longitude of your schoolhouse.
is 39° and longitude 77° west of the meridian of Greenwich.
other place in the world which has the same latitude and longitude as

which is illustrated by these geographical questions, only different
 Instead of latitude the astronomer says _declination_,
says _hour circle_, but he means by these new names the same ideas that

Imagine the earth swollen up until it fills the whole sky; the earth's
distant from the pole, and this line is called the _celestial equator_.
Trace its position along the middle of the map opposite page 190 and
 Every meridian of the swollen earth
 e.
through the pole and therefore perpendicular to the equator.
in the map one of these hour circles is marked 0.
in measuring right ascensions as does the meridian of Greenwich in

the form of a square, one side of which is parallel and close to the
 This is familiarly called the Great
the Big Dipper lies below the pole.
Major is above the pole?
Astronomers use the right ascensions of the stars not only to tell in
regulate their sidereal clocks, and with regard to this use they find
24 of which fill up the circuit of the sky and each of which is equal
 The right ascension of Capella is
 9m.
2°, but the student should accustom himself to using it
 He
equator toward Polaris, and others are on the opposite side, so that the
declinations, just as the geographer distinguishes between north
 This is done by the use of the + and -
i.
, toward Polaris.

 10.
]
Find on Plate II, opposite page 190, the Pleiades (Plēadēs),
 A.
 42m.
 = +23.
 Why do they not show on Plate I,
of the finest star clusters in the sky, but it needs a telescope to
 See how many stars you can count in it with the
 Compare what
--As the stars move across the sky in
equator with them, so that the right ascension and declination of each
remain unchanged by the earth's rotation.
is rising and when it is setting; when it is above the pole and when it
 During each day the hour circle of every star in the
circle is exactly overhead all the stars which lie upon it are said to
 e.
directly over the observer's geographical meridian and upon the

An eye placed at the center of the earth and capable of looking through
background of the sky exactly covering your celestial meridian and
 In Fig.
the inner circle represents the terrestrial meridian of a certain
circle represents the celestial meridian of _O_ as seen from _C_, only
circle is so large that the inner one shrinks to a mere point in
 If _C P_ represents the direction in which the
must be the direction of the equator which we suppose to be turned
point on the earth's surface, then _Z_ directly overhead is called the
 The line _C H_
is the angle which the axis of the earth makes with this horizon plane.
The arc _O E_ measures the latitude of _O_, and the arc _Z E_ measures
arcs contains the same number of degrees as the angle _E C Z_, we have
An obsever who travels north or south over the earth changes his
the axis of the earth.
stars in his sky? If you were to go to the earth's equator, in what part
Australia? From South America? If you were to go from Minnesota to
be changed? How would the appearance of stars in the southern sky be

 12.
]
EXERCISE 8.
when it is at some one of the four points of its diurnal path, shown in
 12.
the star ζ Ursæ Majoris in the handle of the Big Dipper will be
 When at _2_ it is at western elongation, and the star
 When it is at _3_ it is at lower
 When it is at _4_ it
 All of these
and learn to recognize in the sky.
or _4_ may be considered equal to the latitude of the place, but the
must be corrected for the star's distance from the pole, which may be
3°.

 6
stars.
transferred from the box to the vertical standard, and has a screw eye
 When the apparatus has been properly leveled, so that the
is to be pointed at the star by sighting through the centers of the two
face of the vertical standard.
apparatus halfway around so that what was the north side now points
it to the vertical standard, until the screw eyes again point to the
 Rule another line along the same edge of the board as before and
 Use a bicycle
 The student who has
angle between these lines is equal to the altitude of the star.

with your position as shown upon the best map available.
practice and considerable care the latitude may be thus determined
 If
the pole higher up or lower down in the sky by an amount which can be

19.
--To establish a true north and south line upon
is at upper or lower culmination drive into the ground two stakes in
 Such a meridian line is of great
permanently marked in some convenient open space from which, if
 June and November are
culmination early in the evening.

 TIME.
What do you mean by "_the time_"?
The sidereal time at any moment is the right ascension of the hour
 When the hour
time is 6h.
, since that is the right ascension of Sirius, and in
 40m.
time.
 40m.
of Sirius, and if a clock be set to indicate 6h.
 when Sirius
 If the clock is
meridian at the moment when the time shown by the clock is equal to the
 A clock properly regulated for this purpose
and when so regulated it is called a sidereal clock.
be provided with such a clock for his future work, but one such clock
cheapest kind is quite sufficient.

]
EXERCISE 9.
of a star over your meridian.
a meridian line has been marked out on the ground as in § 19, and the
having chosen a suitable star in the southern part of the sky, to place
estimate as nearly as possible the beginning and end of the period
the line.
the star crossed the meridian and at this moment the sidereal time is
 The difference between this
clock or the amount by which its hands must be set back or forward in

A more accurate mode of performing the experiment consists in using the
 7, so that the line
meridian line.
disappears behind the wire as seen through the center of the screw eye.
If the star is too high up in the sky for convenient observation, place
and screw eye by reflection in it.

experiment, and it may be measured from the star map, but it will
the book, and to obtain its right ascension as follows: The table gives
beginning of the year 1900, but on account of the precession (see
on the average the right ascension of each star of the table must be
 e.
in 1910 the right ascension of the first star of the table will be
 38.
 + (10/20)m.
 39.
 The declinations also change
the star maps, their change may be ignored.

more stars in the same way as above.
time and the right ascension, if any is found, is the "correction" of
 This correction ought not to exceed a minute if due care has
 The relation of the
equation, with which the student should become thoroughly familiar:
    A = T ± U
_T_ stands for the time by the clock at which the star crossed the
 _A_ is the right ascension of the star, and _U_ is the
 Use the + sign in the equation whenever the
 _U_ may be found
_T_ and _U_ are given.
right ascensions of the stars and planets.

results agree one with another.

 DEFINITIONS.
sufficient to identify it and distinguish it from every other possible
 If a definition does not come up to this standard it is
 Anything beyond this requirement is certainly useless and

Let the student define the following geographical terms, and let him
poles, meridian, latitude, longitude, north, south, east, west.

definitions, and criticise them in the same way.
improve upon them, commit them to memory:
_The Poles_ of the heavens are those points in the sky toward which the
 How many are there? The one near Polaris is called

_The Celestial Equator_ is a great circle of the sky distant 90° from

_The Zenith_ is that point of the sky, overhead, toward which a plumb
 Why is the word overhead placed in the definition? Is there


_An Hour Circle_ is any great circle of the sky which passes through the
 Every star has its own hour circle.


_A Vertical Circle_ is any great circle that passes through the zenith.
Is the meridian a vertical circle?
_The Declination_ of a star is its angular distance north or south of

_The Right Ascension_ of a star is the angle included between its hour
called the _Vernal Equinox_.
angle is to be measured either at the pole where the two hour circles
equator, as is done in the map opposite page 190.
always measured from the vernal equinox in the direction opposite to
 e.
from west toward east.


_The Azimuth_ of a star is the angle between the meridian and the
 A star due south has an
 Due west, 90°.
 Due east, 270°.


azimuths the same on different days?
_The Hour Angle_ of a star is the angle between its hour circle and the
 It is measured from the meridian in the direction in which the
 e.
west.

Polaris when it is at the lowest point in its daily motion?
22.
--The student must not be satisfied with merely learning
 He must learn to see these points and lines in his
 To this end it will
and the equator seem to stand still in the sky, always in the same place
equinox move with the stars and keep the same place among them.
apparent motion of a star change its declination or right ascension?
Will your answer to the preceding question be true for a star? What is
pole from the zenith? From the vernal equinox? Where are the points in


CHAPTER III
FIXED AND WANDERING STARS

 STAR MAPS.
will be conveniently placed for observation in the evening, and make on
shown upon the map.
upon your paper all the stars of the constellation which are not already
 Both the original drawing and the additions made to it by night
method of allineations may be used with advantage--i.
, the new star
or it makes an equilateral triangle with two others, or a square with

A series of maps of the more prominent constellations, such as Ursa
Corvus, Bootes, Virgo, Hercules, Lyra, Aquila, Scorpius, should be
of the student's work.
the maps as accurately as may be, and note the peculiarity of color
 For the most part their color is a very pale
hue--e.
, Aldebaran or Antares.
is shown in Fig.

So, too, a sharp eye may detect that some stars do not remain always of
and this not on account of cloud or mist in the atmosphere, but from
 Algol is one of the most conspicuous of

[Illustration: FIG.
--Star map of the region about Orion.

 THE MOON'S MOTION AMONG THE STARS.
note its position among the stars by allineations, and plot it on the
 Keep a record of the day and hour
 You will find, if the work is
line shown on the map.

After several such observations have been made and plotted, find by
 How
to the starting point?
On each night when you observe the moon, make on a separate piece of
drawing every feature of the moon's face which you can see--e.
, the
of the line joining the horns; any spots which you can see upon the
 An opera glass will prove of great assistance in this

Use your drawings and the positions of the moon plotted upon the map to
the horns have any special relation to the ecliptic? Does the amount of
distance from the sun? Does it have any relation to the time at which
the same place? Do they come and go? Do they change their position with
rotates about an axis, as the earth does? In what direction does its
Is there any day and night upon the moon?
Each of these questions can be correctly answered from the student's own

25.
--Examine the face of the sun through a

By day as well as by night the sky is studded with stars, only they can
the position of the sun among the stars may be found quite as
right ascension and declination, and this should be practiced at noon on

EXERCISE 10.
with the sidereal clock the time of its transit over the meridian.
the equation in § 20, and substitute in place of _U_ the value of the
following night.
time_, take this into account in the value of _U_.

--To determine the sun's declination, measure its altitude
 Use either the method of Exercise
 The student should be able
 11 that the declination is equal to the sum of the
equation
    Declination = Altitude + Latitude - 90°.

indicates that the sun is on the south side of the equator.

should be plotted on the map and the date, written opposite it.
work has been correctly done, the plotted points should fall upon the
 This line, in

Note that the hours of right ascension increase from 0 up to 24, while
12 again during the same day.
hours, etc.
, and 12 hours

If observations of the sun's right ascension and declination are made
that the sun crosses the equator at these times, and he should determine
this crossing and the point on the equator at which the sun crosses it.
These points are called the equinoxes, Vernal Equinox and Autumnal
student will recall that the vernal equinox is the point from which
 Its position among the stars is found by
much more elaborate apparatus.

midday altitude is about 47° greater in summer than in winter.
also that the sun is as far north of the equator in June as he is south
ecliptic, is inclined to the equator at an angle of 23°.
47°.
 The student may
5
 Is there any connection between
define the torrid zone as that part of the earth's surface within which

--After a half dozen observations of the sun have been
at which the sun moves along the ecliptic.
required for it to move completely around the ecliptic from vernal
elaborate apparatus used by professional astronomers show that this
minutes 46 seconds.
calendars?
26.
--Any one who has watched the sky and who has made the
course of his observations some bright stars not set down on the printed
in position among their fellows, but wander about from one constellation
 Observe the motion of one of these planets from night to
the moon.

wandering stars, and in English we name them planets, which is simply
 Besides the sun and moon
and, as we shall see later, a great number of smaller ones visible only
 More than 2,000 years ago astronomers began observing
account for these motions by the theory that each wandering star moved
 Classical and mediæval literature are
begun by Copernicus (1543 A.
), who taught that the moon alone of
planets revolve around the sun.
plane of the earth's orbit with the sky, and the sun appears to move
is always seen projected against the opposite side of it.
planets all appear to move near the ecliptic because the planes of their
strip on either side of the ecliptic, following its course completely
the name of a narrow street (16° wide) within which all the wanderings
venture.
of the street, the others traveling near the middle of the road.

 14.
]
27.
--The Copernican theory,
gravitation (see Chapter IV), has completely supplanted the older
accounts for the apparently complicated motions of a planet among the
 14 and 15, the first of which represents the
Pisces during the latter part of the year 1894, while the second shows
during the same period.
 14, with cross ruling
represent the distance, in degrees, from the vernal equinox.
 15
vernal equinox, and the angle which this line makes with the line
 The imaginary
the pupil should note that the longitude and length of the radius vector
sun--i.
, they fix the relative positions of the two bodies.
is nearly true for Mars and would be wholly true if the orbit of Mars
 How does Fig.
the orbit of Mars does not lie exactly in the same plane with the orbit

--Find from Fig.
course of Mars among the stars during the period shown in the two
 14.
of Mars among the stars is merely its direction from the earth, and this
 14 by the distance of the planet from

[Illustration: FIG.
--The real motion of a planet.

 15 by
from the earth to Mars.
protractor that the angle between the line _S V_ and the line joining
 14 the position
corresponding to 30° on the ecliptic.
this position of Mars should fall can not be told from Fig.
from necessity is constructed as if the orbits of Mars and the earth lay
exactly on the ecliptic and to oscillate back and forth as shown in Fig.
14, but without the up-and-down motion there shown.
Fig.
and observe how the forward motion of the two planets in their orbits
the stars.

 16.
]
28.
--Each planet, great or small, moves in
these orbits, their sizes, shapes, positions, etc.
great problems of astronomy for more than 2,000 years, in which
higher degree of accuracy the knowledge attained by their predecessors.
Without attempting to enter into the details of this problem we may say,
and for the six planets visible to the naked eye these planes nearly
lying in the flat surface of one map.
use two maps, such as Figs.
planets, Mercury, Venus, the earth, and Mars, which are near the sun,
other shows the more distant planets, Jupiter and Saturn, together with
between the two diagrams.
and are intended to be used by the student for accurate measurement in

In addition to the six planets shown in the figures the solar system
part invisible to the naked eye, which are omitted in order to avoid

29.
--In Fig.
by the orbits of the three planets, and inclosing all of these is a
constellations which lie along the zodiac.
carefully that it is only the directions of these constellations that
been placed very much too close to the sun.
from the orbit of the earth toward the sun with Roman numerals opposite
January (_I_), first day of February (_II_), etc.
attached to the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn with Arabic numerals show
indicated, so that the figure serves to show not only the orbits of the
than the first decade of the twentieth century.

direction to the vernal equinox.
measures a planet's longitude.

 17.
]
EXERCISE 14.
January 1st.
longitude of Jupiter on January 1, 1900; on July 1, 1900; on September

Draw neatly on the map a pencil line connecting the position of the
date, and produce the line beyond Jupiter until it meets the circle of
 This line represents the direction of Jupiter from
appears at that date.
the sky is not a very accurate one, since on the scale of the diagram
shown in the figure, and the pencil mark does not meet the line of
pushed back to its true position.
another line from the sun parallel to the one first drawn, and its
true position of Jupiter in the sky.

--Find the present positions of Jupiter and Saturn, and look
 The planets will appear
map.

sun more rapidly? Which travels the greater number of miles per day?
earth move faster or slower than Jupiter?
The distance of Jupiter or Saturn from the earth at any time may be
 Thus, by direct measurement with the
from the earth is 6.
this may be turned into miles by multiplying it by 93,000,000, which is
 For most purposes
distance 6.
is the distance of the sun from the earth.

--What is Jupiter's distance from the earth at its nearest
least distance from the earth greater or less than its least distance

and the sun? On this day Jupiter is said to be in _opposition_--i.
,
then comes to the meridian of any and every place at midnight.
sun is between the earth and Jupiter (at what date in 1906?) the planet
meridian with the sun at noon.
time at which Jupiter comes to the meridian at other dates than
evening hours? Tell from the figure what constellation is on the
 Will it be the same constellation

30.
--Fig.
the inner planets, differs from Fig.
positions of the planets in their orbits at any given date.
of these planets is so rapid, on account of their proximity to the sun,
Saturn, and with the exception of the earth they do not always return to
 It is therefore necessary
extending from the sun toward the vernal equinox, _V_, is called the
motion around the sun crosses this line on September 23d in each year,
only to take the point at which the prime radius intersects the earth's
 A month later, on October 23d, the earth will no longer be at
30 (thirty days after September 23d).
will be at the point marked 60, etc.
find the number of days intervening between it and the preceding
earth in its orbit.


270 and 300 shows the position of the earth on that date.

constellation came to the meridian at midnight on that date? What other

manner, save that they do not cross the prime radius on the same date in
the following table:
each of these planets requires to make a complete revolution about the
revolutions in its orbit per year, and therefore crosses the prime
slower in their movements.
each year the date at which each planet first crossed the prime radius
by adding once, twice, or three times the period to the given date, and
adding multiples of the period.
there is only about one year out of two in which this planet crosses the

After the date at which the planet crosses the prime radius has been
case of the earth, and the constellation in which the planet will appear
and Saturn.

the places in the sky occupied by Mercury, Venus, and Mars on July 4,
 Let the student make a similar construction and find the positions
 Look them up in the sky and see if

31.
--The "evening star" is a term loosely applied to any
 It is easy
than is the sun, and in either Fig.
 17 any planet which
not more than 50° away from it will be an evening star.
of the sun it is a morning star, and may be seen in the eastern sky

What planet is the evening star _now_? Is there more than one evening

maximum angular distance from the sun at which Venus can ever be seen?
of the year does Mars come nearest to the earth? Will it always be
nearest to the earth?
The earth always comes to the same longitude on the same day of each
 Why is not this true of the other planets?
The student should remember that in one respect Figs.
altogether correct representations, since they show the orbits as all
 If this were strictly true, every planet would
orbits are tilted a little out of the plane of the ecliptic and every
side then to the other; but not even Mars, which is the most erratic in
and for the most part all of them are much closer to the ecliptic than





32.
--From the earliest dawn of
of sun and moon and planets among the stars from constellation to
of the class of priests.
and teachers stood in closest relations with the movements of the stars,

[Illustration: ISAAC NEWTON (1643-1727).

research, there grew up and flourished for many centuries a study of the
observations that could then be made were at best but rough ones, but
mechanic arts put better and more precise instruments into the hands of
movements of these bodies.
part the planets, including the sun and moon, traveled through the
motion and for a time traveled in the opposite way.
be explained by the simple theory which had early been adopted that a
the earth at its center, and so it was said to move around in a small
and moved along a circular orbit, called the deferent, within which the
 18, where the small circle is the
the earth.
complicated movements of the planets, another epicycle was put on top of
became so complicated that Copernicus, a Polish astronomer, repudiated
place in circles around the sun instead of about the earth, and that the
appropriate orbit and itself largely responsible for the seemingly
them and observe their positions from different points of view.

 18.
]
33.
--Two generations later came Kepler with his three

 Every planet moves in an ellipse which has the sun at one of its

II.
times.

 The squares of the periodic times of the planets are proportional

These laws are the crowning glory, not only of Kepler's career, but of
well deserve careful study and explanation, although more modern

EXERCISE 17.
fasten to them the ends of a string a foot long.
the string with the point of a lead pencil and, keeping the string drawn

points which are called its foci.

and, in accordance with the first law, the center of the sun is at the
 In Fig.
marked _a_, shows the position of the vacant focus of the orbit of Mars,
 The orbits of
very close to the sun and are not marked in the figure.
from the sun to any point of the orbit (the string from pin to pencil
 The point midway between the pins is the
measures the _eccentricity_ of the ellipse.

at different distances apart, and note that the greater the eccentricity

If both pins were driven into the same hole, what kind of an ellipse

suggested by the first law.
 17 it is apparent from a mere
on one side of its orbit than on the other, the distance covered in ten
greater than that between 50 and 60.
though usually in less degree, for every other planet, and Kepler's
figures showing the positions of the planet at the end of equal
 His solution of this problem, contained in the second
marked points taken at equal time intervals around the orbit, then the
included between them is equal to the area of each and every other such
long arc between them while the long radii vectores have a short arc.
Kepler's form of stating the law the radius vector is supposed to travel
of the total area of the orbit.
 17

For the proper understanding of Kepler's Third Law we must note that the
the orbit and that the "periodic time" means the number of days or years

as the mathematical equivalent of the law,
    a^{3} ÷ T^{2} = C
where the quotient, _C_, is a number which, as Kepler found, is the same
 If we take the mean distance of
of time, we shall find by applying the equation to the earth's motion,
 Applying this value to any other planet we shall find in the
distance of any planet from the sun when its periodic time, _T_, has

EXERCISE 18.
orbit.
distances of Mercury, Venus, and Mars? (See Chapter III for their
) Would it be possible for two planets at different



 NEWTON'S LAWS OF MOTION.
the planets.
 D.
described the mechanism which controls that motion.
age the heavens were supernatural, while to Newton and his successors
the earth, and we turn to the ordinary things of everyday life as the

Every one who has ridden a bicycle knows that he can coast farther upon
hard the road may be and however fast the wheel may have been started,
air offer to its motion, and when once stopped or checked it can be
 We have here a familiar

--"Every body continues in its state of rest or
compelled by force to change that state.
careless movement of the rider may turn the bicycle to the right or the
ahead, and if all resistance to its motion could be removed it would go
to the one hand nor the other.

applied additional power to the wheel, and when this speed is slackened
 It is
of motion; but simple as this law now appears it required the genius of
stated above.

 THE SECOND LAW OF MOTION, which is also due to Galileo and Newton,

the direction of the straight line in which the force acts.
man to fall from a balloon at some great elevation in the air; his own
every instant is sufficient to give him at the end of the first second
 e.
changed his state from rest, to motion at this rate, and the motion is
 During the
effect as in the first second and will add another 32 feet to his
be moving at the rate of 64 feet per second, etc.
marked _v_ in the table below shows what his velocity will be at the end
 The changing velocity here shown is the change of
time shown in the first column of the table, because the amount of force
operated.
shown in the column marked _d_, and is found by taking the average of
distance through which he has fallen at the end of each second, marked
of _d_.
motion in each second, also measures the _accelerating force_ which
letter _g_.
accelerating force, the time, _t_, during which it operates, and the


 How does the table



     1     32    16    16
     3     96    80   144
     5    160   144   400
  etc.
  etc.

the ground? What would be the velocity just before reaching the ground?
[Illustration: GALILEO GALILEI (1564-1642).

 19 shows the path through the air of a ball which has been struck
velocity of 200 feet per second.
motion, if it were acted upon by no other force than the impulse given
uniform rate of 200 feet per second, and at the end of the fourth second
four seconds its weight has caused it to fall 256 feet, and its actual
 In this way we find its
, and drawing a
under the influence of the two forces to be the curved line _A C_.
matter how far the ball may go before striking the ground, it can not
part of a circle, since that curve returns into itself.
a part of a _parabola_, which, as we shall see later, is a kind of orbit
 A skyrocket moves
object hurled through the air.

 19.
]
36.
--"To every action there is always an equal
always equal and oppositely directed.
case of a man climbing a rope hand over hand.
which he exerts is a downward pull upon the rope, and it is the reaction
 We shall find in a
earth and moon.

recognized that these simple laws of motion hold true in the heavens as
comet, or a star is determined in accordance with these laws by the
the same as that which we call weight.
principle last named is included in--
37.
--"Every particle of matter in the
that of a line joining the two, and whose magnitude is directly as the
from each other.
pulled toward the earth by a force (weight) which is called, in the
significance of the law of gravitation.
force in the heavens, but he extended an old and familiar one from a
and furnished a precise statement of the way in which the force
 Whether a body be hot or cold, wet or dry, solid, liquid, or
since this depends solely upon mass and distance.

language which it is customary to employ in this connection.
gravitation is certainly a far-reaching one, and it may operate in every
additional information about those corners would be welcome to
there.
"When I lift my hand I move the stars in Ursa Major," but we should not
rigorous interpretation of the Newtonian law.

quantity of matter contained in the body, and if we represent by the
the two bodies whose distance from each other is _r_, we shall have, in
expression for the force, _F_, which acts between them:
    F = k {m´m´´/r^{2}}.

of gravitation, may be made to yield some curious results.
select two bullets, each having a mass of 1 gram, and place them so that
exerted between them becomes
    F = k {(1 × 1)/1^{2}} = k,
from which it appears that the coefficient _k_ is the force exerted
 This is called the gravitation constant, and it
particle of matter attracts another.
been made to determine the amount of this force show that it is
gram each is supposed to be concentrated into an indefinitely small
than forty minutes in order to pull them together, although they were
inertia opposed their movements.
masses _m´_, _m´´_ are very great that the force of gravity becomes
considerable because of the great quantity of matter which goes to make
 Many of the heavenly bodies are much more massive than the
gravitation to determine numerically their masses, or, in more popular

The student should observe that the two terms mass and weight are not
a body, while weight is the force with which the earth attracts that
upon its distance from the center of the earth, while its mass is quite

By the third law of motion the earth is pulled toward a falling body
 e.
force equal to the weight of the body.
toward the body?
38.
--In Fig.
planet or other celestial body, which for the moment is moving along the
 In accordance with the first law of motion it would
force acted upon it; but such a force, the sun's attraction, is acting,
_P 1_.

with which the sun attracts it, the mathematician is able to apply
few of the possible orbits are shown in the figure where the short cross
 This

Without any formal application of mathematics we may readily see that
during which it is subjected to the sun's attraction at close range, and
motion, will be small, as in the orbits _P 1_ and _P 2_.

velocity at _P_ was comparatively small, and the resulting change of

What would be the orbit if the velocity at _P_ were reduced to nothing

from _1_?
[Illustration: FIG.
--Different kinds of orbits.

to pull the body at _P_ forward along its path, and therefore increases
perihelion, at which point it attains its greatest velocity, and the
direction of its motion.
sun begins to pull backward and to retard the motion in just the same
two halves of the orbit on opposite sides of a line drawn from the
 We may here note the
moves faster, and the radius vector changes its direction more rapidly
force with which it is attracted, and the exact relation between the
as given by the second law, depends upon the changes in this force.

planet has passed perihelion, finally overcomes it and turns the planet
moving in the same direction and with the same speed as before--i.
,
along which it will continue to move ever after.
note that this return into the same orbit is a consequence of the last
 54), and that, if
or any other proportion than the square, the orbit would be something
 If the velocity is too great for the sun's attraction to
body will move away never to return, while a velocity just at the limit
which the body moves with _parabolic velocity_, which is ever
sufficient to keep it from returning.
increased 41 per cent, from 19 up to 27 miles per second, it would have

The summation of the whole matter is that the orbit in which a body
this velocity and the direction of the motion at any one point in the
of the planet in its orbit for past as well as future times can be
true for any other heavenly body--moon, comet, meteor, etc.
this way that astronomers are able to predict, years in advance, in what

It is sometimes a source of wonder that the planets move in ellipses
 20 that the planet,
of its motion at _P_ is not at right angles with the line joining it to
perpendicular to the radius vector the planet must needs have exactly
speed would change the circle into an ellipse.
circular motion there must be a balancing of conditions as nice as is
thing is that the orbits of the planets should be so nearly circular as
 If the orbit of the earth were drawn accurately to scale, the
circle, and even the orbit of Mercury (Fig.
eccentric than that of the earth, might almost pass for a circle.

 21.
]
The orbit _P 2_, which lies between the parabola and the straight line,
the law of gravitation that a body might move under the sun's attraction
some one of these curves; no other orbit is possible.
not be possible for a body moving under the law of gravitation to
 21.
body passes a second time through any point of its orbit, such as _P_ in
it first traversed in getting from _P_ around to _P_ again--i.
, the

  [1] The circle and straight line are considered to be special cases
      sections.

the law of gravitation, and that to be strictly correct the third law
planets.
sun, that the correction is of comparatively little moment.

 PERTURBATIONS.
planet under the influence of no other force than the sun's attraction,
the universe is in some measure attracting it and changing its motion.
The resulting disturbances in the motion of the attracted body are
because the bodies by whose disturbing attractions they are caused are
_P_, comes under the influence of some great disturbing power like
their influence need to be taken into account.

must then be dealt with is vastly more complicated than that which we
been able to furnish a complete solution for it, although they have
amount of detailed information concerning it.

]
In general each planet works ceaselessly upon the orbit of every other,
accordance with the law of gravitation, and it is a question of serious
 If the diameter of the earth's
the other planets, the amount of heat received from the sun would be
for the support of life.
into a new position might also produce serious consequences; but the
proving from the law of gravitation that although both of these changes
go far enough to prove of serious consequence, and the same is true for
exception to the rule.

of slightly different character from the above, and another is found in
 It will be remembered
ecliptic, but in a complete circuit of the heavens crosses it twice,

under the perturbing influence of the sun these nodes move westward
rapid perturbation, and one of great consequence in the theory of

[Illustration: FIG.
--A planet subject to great perturbations by
]
40.
--Although these perturbations can not be
for weighing the planets which produce them.
we learn that the ability of a planet to produce perturbations depends
this mass, _m´_, as a factor.
expression for the force shows that the distance between the disturbing
the distance the greater the force.
planet such as Jupiter is to be determined from the perturbations it
presented in Fig.
is represented as moving in a very eccentric orbit, which at one point
near to the orbit of the earth.
any very great disturbing influence upon a planet moving in such an
Jupiter approach so close to each other, as is shown in the figure.
time during which the asteroid is little affected by the attraction of
attraction--that is, to determine carefully the undisturbed orbit in
close to Jupiter, as shown in the figure, and the orbital motion which
planet next comes round to the part of its orbit near the earth the
be exaggerated by its close proximity to the earth.
astronomer observes the actual position of the asteroid in the sky, its
assigned to the planet by the law of gravitation when the attraction of
ascensions and declinations and those computed upon the theory of
the asteroid, and the amount by which Jupiter has shifted it, compared
in its orbit--furnishes the mass of Jupiter expressed as a fractional

There has been determined in this manner the mass of every planet in the
perturbation, and all these masses prove to be exceedingly small
table, in which is given opposite the name of each planet the number by
the planet:
It is to be especially noted that the mass given for each planet
influence was felt in the perturbations from which the mass was derived.
Thus the mass assigned to the earth is the combined mass of earth and

41.
--The most famous example of perturbations is
the outermost planet of the solar system.
Uranus, his next neighbor, had proved a puzzle to astronomers.
accordance with Kepler's first law this planet should move in an ellipse
exactly fitted its observed path among the stars, although, to be sure,
 Astronomers surmised that the small
observation could assign, were due to perturbations in its motion
conjecture but hard to prove, and harder still to find the unknown
 But almost simultaneously two young men, Adams in England and
other, and carried it to a successful solution, showing that if the
planet, then that planet must, in September, 1846, be in the direction
by the astronomers of the Berlin Observatory whom Le Verrier had invited
law of gravitation in his hands had assigned to it.

the cause which produced them is justly regarded as one of the greatest
that we are approaching the time at which it may be repeated, for
and the most plausible explanation which can be offered for these
again enlarged to include another disturbing planet.

 THE SHAPE OF A PLANET.
touched upon, which is of considerable interest and wide application in
, its influence in determining the shape of the heavenly
 The earth is a globe because every part of it is drawn toward
on its surface were everywhere of equal force the material of the earth
have been the shape in which it was originally made.
real condition of the earth, for its diurnal rotation develops in every
but which is really nothing more than the inertia of its particles,
motion and which thus resist the attraction that pulls them into a
at the end of a string and swung swiftly in a circle pulls upon the
 A
harder does it pull upon the string, and the same is true of each
greater centrifugal force than the slow ones near the poles.
equator the centrifugal force is directly opposed to the force of
an excess of gravity at the poles which compresses the earth along its
restored.
the earth, this compression amounts to about 27 miles, but in the larger
thousand miles.

of shape.
stronger on the near side and weaker on the far side of our satellite
moon, as is illustrated in Fig.
pieces of iron of equal mass placed in line on a table near a horseshoe
 Each piece of iron is attracted by the magnet and is held
a pulley, _P_, at the edge of the table.
supposed equally heavy and each of them pulls upon its piece of iron
the middle piece, No.
 It is clear that under this arrangement No.
_2_ will move neither to the right nor to the left, since the forces

 _1_, however, the magnet pulls harder than upon No.
because it is nearer and its pull therefore more than balances the force
 _1_ will be pulled away from No.
and will stretch the elastic cords, which are represented by the lines
exerted by the weight, just balances the attraction of the magnet.
No.
weight, and it will also be pulled away from No.
cords are stretched to the proper tension.
three blocks which, without the magnet's influence, would be held close
far as the resistance of the cords will permit.

 23.
]
An entirely analogous set of forces produces a similar effect upon the
 The elastic cords of Fig.
of gravitation by which all the parts of the moon are bound together.
The magnet represents the earth pulling with unequal force upon
 The weights are the inertia of the moon in
the whole just balances the earth's attraction and keeps the moon from
 The effect of these forces is to stretch out the
stretched out along the line of the magnet, and to make this diameter

[Illustration: FIG.
--The tides.

--Similarly the moon and the sun attract opposite sides of the
 But
axis that its solid parts have no time in which to yield sensibly to the
parts of the earth are turned toward the moon, and it is chiefly the
and moon's attraction.
earth so as to produce a slight elongation of its diameter, and Fig.
shows how by the earth's rotation this swelling of the waters is swept
takes up some such position as that shown in the figure where the effect
moon's attraction urging it back on line with the moon.
of the waters is called a _tide_.
little island in the sea the waters which surround it will of course
whenever the island comes back to the position _I_, the waters will
what is called high tide or flood tide.
half a day later, they will again rise in flood tide, and midway between

The height of the tide raised by the moon in the open sea is only a very
coast of a continent, in bays and angles of the shore, it often happens
the rise of the water may be many feet, especially when the solar tide
new and full moon.
some other?
Small as are these tidal effects, it is worth noting that they may in
 g.
as is the sun its tidal effect would be some millions of times greater

fortunate, and we shall see in later chapters some evidence of their

43.
--In all the domain of physical
gravitation; none other that has been so dwelt upon, studied, and
be considered so indisputably proved.
analysis, based upon this law, has pointed out conclusions which, though
himself derived as a corollary from this law that the earth ought to be
by actual measurement until long afterward.
capacity for predicting the unknown and for explaining in minutest
constitutes the real proof of the law of gravitation, and it is
few points at which the law fails to furnish a satisfactory account of
 Chief among these is the case of the planet Mercury,
which the law of gravitation as yet furnishes no explanation.
this is because the law itself is inaccurate or incomplete, or whether
the law and traced out its consequences, we do not know; but whether it
here, in its most perfect chapter, astronomy still remains an incomplete





44.
--The student is presumed to have learned, in
diameter and, without dwelling upon the "proofs" which are commonly
which the measurement of the earth's size and shape are based.

 25.
]
In Fig.
is the axis about which it rotates, and the dotted lines represent a
distant that the dotted lines are all practically parallel to each
 The several radii drawn through the points _1_, _2_, _3_,
which these radii produced, make with the rays of starlight are each
at the moment the star crosses the meridian.
Chapter II, how these angles may be measured, and it is apparent from
 g.
the angles at _1_ and _2_--is equal to the angle at the center, _O_,
 By measuring these angular distances of
of the earth between the stations _1_, _2_, _3_, etc.
observations are made.
of zenith distance of the star, as one traveled along a meridian from
degrees for each hundred miles traveled--and observations made in many
whole, as we approach the pole it is necessary to travel a little
equator.
about 27 miles in the length of its diameter, and by this amount, as
the earth differs from a perfect sphere.
of the curvature of the earth's surface furnish by far the most
as its equatorial diameter 7,926 miles.

 e.
which the equatorial diameter exceeds the polar, the size of the earth
surface and by combining with this the angle _1 O 2_ obtained through

find how far you must go from its vertex in order to have the distance
measured distance between _1_ and _2_.
will be the earth's radius.

--Measure the diameter of the earth by the method given
 In order that this may be done satisfactorily, the two stations
distance--i.
, 200 miles.
if they are on different meridians in place of the actual distance
the meridian--i.
, the north and south part of the distance.

using a good map to obtain the required distances, the diameter of the
II and determined within a small percentage of its true value.

 THE MASS OF THE EARTH.
of determining the masses of the planets as fractional parts of the
measuring these masses after the common fashion in kilogrammes or tons.
To do this we must first get the mass of the earth in tons or
simple enough, their actual application is delicate and difficult.

 26.
weighing the earth.

 26 we suppose a long plumb line to be suspended above the
_C_, by a force whose intensity is (Chapter IV)
    F = k mE/R^{2},
where _E_ denotes the mass of the earth, which is to be determined by
 If there is
downward, but if a massive ball of lead or other heavy substance is
equal to
    f = k mB/r^{2},
where _r_ is the distance of its center from the plumb bob and _B_ is
 In
one side, as shown by the dotted line, and if we represent by _l_ the
and the disturbed positions of the plumb bob we may write the proportion
    F : f :: l : d;
and introducing the values of _F_ and _f_ given above, and solving for


In this equation the mass of the ball, _B_, the length of the plumb
the plumb bob, _r_, and the radius of the earth, _R_, can all be
to one side by the ball, is readily found by shifting the ball over to
plumb bob moves.

By methods involving these principles, but applied in a manner more
be, in tons, 6,642 × 10^{18}--i.
, 6,642 followed by 18 ciphers, or in
 The earth's atmosphere makes up about a

If the length of the plumb line were 100 feet, the weight of the ball a
_2_, six feet, how many inches, _d_, would the plumb bob be pulled out

in tons.
 The computation can be very greatly

46.
--That the earth is isolated in space and has no support
visible upon every side of it, and no support can be seen stretching out
 We must then consider the earth to be a globe traveling
and rotating once in every twenty-four hours about an axis which remains
 The student
reference to the stars, the direction of the sun from the earth changes
 Does this prove that the earth revolves about the

among the stars.
manner of Exercise 7, it will be found that slowly the pole is moving
smaller circle in its diurnal path, while stars on the other side of the
) become more distant from it and describe
slowly that the space of a lifetime is required for the motion of the

Spin a top and note how its rapid whirl about its axis corresponds to
 When the axis about which the top spins is
little away from the vertical it begins to wobble, so that if we imagine
marker, this would trace a circle around the zenith, along which the
more the top is tipped from the vertical the larger does this circle
 Were it not
when tipped from the vertical position, but the spin combines with the
 Spin
to the hands of a watch, and note the effect which is produced upon the

The earth presents many points of resemblance to the top.
rotation is the spin about the axis.
5° away from
axis of the top is tipped away from the vertical line.
its rapid spin, the body of the earth bulges out at the equator (27
IV), lay hold of this protuberance and pull it down toward the plane of
straighten the axis up and set it perpendicular to the orbit plane.
here, as in the case of the top, the spin and the tipping force combine
recognize in the shifting position of the pole among the stars.
motion of precession is very much slower than the wobbling of the top,
period of nearly 26,000 years is required for a complete circuit of the
 Friction ultimately stops both the spin
case of the earth, and both rotation and precession go on unchanged from
change the direction or rate of the precessional motion, first in one
of consequence.

having an angular radius of 23.
toward which a perpendicular to the plane of the earth's orbit points,
 0m.
declination 66.

EXERCISE 20.
the path of the pole about it.
toward the constellation Cepheus.
this path at intervals of 1,000 years, and refer to these positions in

of precession? Do the tipping forces applied to the earth and top act in
Great Pyramid of Egypt is thought to have been used as an observatory
 How long ago

with it, and thus slowly changes the right ascensions and declinations
 On this account it is frequently called the precession
a matter of some consequence in connection with chronology and the

Will the precession ever bring back the right ascensions and

Will its motion ever bring it exactly to Polaris? How far away from
be brought near the pole by the precession?
47.
--Winter and summer alike the day is on the
of heat comes from the sun by day and is lost by night through radiation
mass of molten iron is radiated away and the iron cooled when it is
 The
and were it not for the influx of solar heat this radiation would
zero"--i.
, a state in which all heat has been taken away and beyond
 This must not be
since it lies nearly 500° below the zero of the Fahrenheit scale (-273°
weather seem warm, although the ordinary thermometer may register
 The heat radiated by the sun into the
cooling process, a hot body giving up its heat to the colder space about
and in small part intercepted by the earth, which warms the latter and

Observe the fluctuations, the ebb and flow, which are inherent in this
 From sunset to sunrise there is nothing to compensate the
with the sunrise there comes an influx of solar heat, feeble at first
and more efficient as the sun rises higher in the sky.
and the ground grow warm during the morning hours they part more and
or a cup of coffee radiates heat more rapidly when very hot.
hour of the day is reached when these opposing tendencies of income and
factors as wind and clouds, the gain in temperature usually extends to
of the sun renders his rays less efficient, when radiation gains the
then commences to fall steadily until the next sunrise.

 e.
which, within a definite and uniform period (24 hours), oscillates from
repeating substantially the same variation day after day.
understood that minor causes not taken into account above, such as
, produce other fluctuations from day to day which
temperature caused by the sun.

position that the sunlight strikes perpendicularly upon it; then turn
much more vigorous is the warming effect of the sun in the first
 It is chiefly this difference of angle that
when he is near the horizon, and more effective in summer than in

We have seen in Chapter III that the sun's motion among the stars takes
equator to a distance of 23.
risings and later settings, as we pass from the equator toward the north
each day in the northern hemisphere will become a little longer, each
the zenith until this process culminates toward the end of June, when
altitudes until the Christmas season, when again it is reversed and the
 We have here another periodic variation, which runs
this variation must have a marked effect on the warming of the earth,
of that season, while the shorter days and lower altitudes of December,
cold.
winter, is caused by the varying altitude of the sun, and this in turn
amount by which the axis of the earth is tipped from being perpendicular
in the warming of the earth, quite comparable with the diurnal change

It is evident that the period within which the succession of winter and
time required by the sun to go from the vernal equinox around to the
motions north and south from the equator.
motion of the equinox (precession) this is not quite the same as the
is a little shorter (20m.
), since the equinox moves back to meet

48.
--It is clear that both the northern
kind of seasons, since the motion of the sun north and south affects
hemisphere most effectively, his light falls more obliquely upon the
time we are enjoying summer, while six months later the conditions are

In those parts of the earth near the equator--the torrid zone--there is
the sun never gets more than 23.
every day of the year he mounts high in the tropic skies, always coming
5° of the zenith, and usually closer than this, so that there
higher latitudes, and within the tropics the temperature is therefore

In the frigid zones, on the contrary, the sun never rises high in the
5°, and during the
low the whole year round, and during the winter season, when for weeks
temperature falls to a degree unknown in more favored climes.

the effect upon the seasons in the temperate zones? What if it were made

upon the climate of different parts of the earth?
If the axis of the earth pointed toward Arcturus instead of Polaris,

 THE ATMOSPHERE.
outside the earth, but at the bottom of a sea of air which forms the
miles.
that branch of physics called meteorology, but there are a few matters
 We
light which comes through it is bent and oftentimes distorted so as to
heavenly bodies.
eye, and the stars are said to twinkle--i.
, to quiver and change
condition of the air and not from anything which goes on in the star.
This effect is more marked low down in the sky than near the zenith, and
light they send to the earth comes from a disk of sensible area, while a
reduced practically to a mere point whose light is more easily affected
comes from the planets' disk.

 REFRACTION.
light is bent in its passage through the atmosphere, so that the stars
 This
observations of the more precise class, although save at low altitudes
is much exaggerated in amount and becomes easily visible to the naked
with their long diameters horizontal.
and lower edge of the sun, but lifts the lower edge more than the upper,
 See Fig.
this effect, but also the reflection of the sun from the curved surface
 If the surface of the
sun's disk, and its altered appearance is sometimes cited as a proof

The total amount of the refraction at the horizon is a little more than
angle of about half a degree, we have the remarkable result that in
instant that the lower edge appears to touch the horizon and sunset or
 The same effect exists at sunrise, and as a consequence
minutes longer each day than it would be if there were no atmosphere and
 A partial offset to this benefit is found in the fact
stars appear much less bright when near the horizon than when they are
can be looked at with the naked eye without the discomfort which its

[Illustration: FIG.
--Flattening of the sun's disk by refraction and
]
51.
--Another effect of the atmosphere, even more marked
 As at sunrise the mountain top
sunset it keeps them after they have faded from the regions below, so
catch the sunlight and reflect it to the surface of the earth while the
that vague and diffuse light which we call twilight.

 28.
]
Fig.
atmosphere, which is illuminated on the left by the rays of the sun, but

atmosphere above him is illumined with its rays, which furnish a bright
 When, by the earth's rotation, this observer has been carried
while to the west there is a part of the atmosphere from which there
part of the atmosphere about our observer lies in the shadow, and it is
and moisture are much less abundant than in the lower strata.
later, when the observer has been carried by the earth's rotation to the
because all of the illuminated part of the atmosphere is now below his
 In the figure the sun
but this is a gross exaggeration, made for the sake of clearness in the
below the horizon.

 28 on a large scale, so that the points _1_
 He
of the earth, and measuring the length of the line _2 L_, he should find
radius of the earth--i.
, a little less than 50 miles.
is not the true height of the atmosphere.
this, but the particles of dust and vapor which are capable of sending

The student should not fail to watch the eastern sky after sunset, and
retreats steadily toward the west.

 29.
]
_Duration of twilight.
the horizon, any circumstance which makes the sun go down rapidly will
downward motion of the sun will correspondingly prolong it.
influences of this kind is the angle which the sun's course makes with
 If it goes straight down, as at _a_, Fig.
shorter time will suffice to carry it to a depression of 18° than is
very oblique to the horizon.
different seasons of the year, we shall find every possible variety of
of twilight varies from an all-night duration in the summers of Scotland
 For
somewhat exaggerated by Coleridge in the lines,
    "The sun's rim dips; the stars rush out:
"
_
In the United States the longest twilights come at the end of June, and
March and September, amounting to a little more than an hour and a half;
distinguished from night, so small is the quantity of reflecting matter
 For practical convenience it is
after sunset.


_--One other phenomenon of the atmosphere may be mentioned,
 The
thunderstorm, and its explanation belongs to the subject of terrestrial





52.
--To measure any quantity we need a unit in terms of
 Angles are measured in degrees, and the
 For most scientific purposes
and similarly a day is the fundamental unit for the measurement of time.
Hours, minutes, and seconds are aliquot parts of this unit convenient
and year which we use in our calendars are multiples of the day.

one revolution upon its axis, but it is best defined as the amount of
circuit from the meridian of a particular place through west and east
 The day begins at the moment when this
moment is the hour angle of this particular part of the sky--i.
, the
, that have elapsed since it was on the

The student has already become familiar with the kind of day which is
sidereal time, and he has seen that sidereal time, while very convenient
the ordinary affairs of life since in the reckoning of the hours it
 One can not tell off-hand
 We
the apparent diurnal motion of the sun, and we may, if we choose, take
meridian shall mark the beginning and the end of the day.
"the time" is the number of hours, minutes, etc.
since the sun was on the meridian, and this is the kind of time which is
clocks and watches became common.
about a degree per day, it is easily seen that the rotating earth will
sun around to the sun again, than to carry it from a star around to the
again; just as the minute hand of a clock turns farther in going from
XII to XII.
little longer than the corresponding sidereal ones, and this furnishes
solar time, every night than on the night before, and why sidereal time
3m.
5s.
complete circuit of the constellations once in a year.

century ago this kind of solar time went out of common use, since no
 The earth in its
than in others, and in consequence the sun appears to move more rapidly
convergence of hour circles as we go away from the equator, the same
summer when the sun is north or south, than it does in the spring and
these causes and other minor ones true solar time, as it is called, is
at a variable rate, sometimes quicker, sometimes slower.
day, from noon to noon, is 51 seconds shorter in September than in

[Illustration: FIG.
--The equation of time.

 MEAN SOLAR TIME.
invented and brought into common use what is called _mean solar time_,
sidereal time, loses exactly one day per year.
never differs much from true solar time, and the difference between the
read from the curve in Fig.
line marked _0m_ shows how many minutes mean solar time is faster than
 The correct name for this difference between the two
frequently marked "sun fast" or "sun slow.
solar time the distinction between A.
 hours (_ante meridiem_ =
 M.
after the sun has passed the meridian) is not observed, "the time" being
equinox is on the meridian.
introduce into common use this mode of reckoning the hours, beginning
24, when the next date is reached and a new start made.
would simplify railway time tables and similar publications; but the
practical use in Canada and Spain.

 TO FIND (APPROXIMATELY) THE SIDEREAL TIME AT ANY MOMENT.

 Let _W_ represent the time shown by
and by _D_ the number of days that have elapsed from March 23d to the

and March 23d is the date on which sidereal and mean solar time are
little from year to year on account of the extra day introduced in leap

RULE II.
 Find β
line from Polaris to the zenith.
between these lines, provided that that angle must be measured from the
 Turn the angle from degrees into hours by

55.
--We are familiar with the fact that a watch
inquire if the same is not true of our chief timepiece--the earth.
assumed in the sections upon the measurement of time that the earth
never gains or loses even the smallest fraction of a second.
this be absolutely true or not, no one has ever succeeded in finding
has recently been shown that the axis about which it rotates is not
 The solid body of the
position of the north pole upon the earth's surface changes within a
more than this distance away from its average position.
caused by the periodical shifting of masses of air and water from one
probable that these changes will produce some small effect upon the
 But in spite of these, for any such moderate
goes, we may regard the earth's rotation as uniform and undisturbed.
longer intervals--e.
, 1,000,000 or 10,000,000 years--the question is
connection.

 LONGITUDE AND TIME.
reference to the meridian.
meridian.
meridian.
over a meridian line actually laid out upon the ground, etc.
place upon the earth has its own meridian from which "the time" may be
 31, where the rays of sunlight are represented as
of New York, Chicago, and San Francisco pass, it is evident that these
farther from the meridian of New York than from that of San Francisco by
 This
two places, and the student should note that the word longitude is here
 From Fig.
the
_Theorem.
equal to their difference of longitude, and the time at the eastern
 Astronomers usually
 1h.

The name given to any kind of time should distinguish all the elements
 g.
of the vernal equinox measured from the meridian of New York, Chicago
of Chicago, etc.

 31.

 32.
]
57.
--The requirements of railroad traffic have led to the
each of which is a mean solar time some integral number of hours slower
Greenwich, England.


    Mountain "      7  "      "     "    "         "

 32 the broken lines indicate roughly the parts of the United
illustrate how irregular are the boundaries of these parts.

offices of the United States, and serves to regulate watches and clocks,

58.
--With an ordinary watch observe the time
time for the equation of time by means of the curve in Fig.
 The
correction of your watch referred to local mean solar time.
watch with the time signals in the nearest telegraph office and find its
 The difference between the two
standard meridian.

 B.
" No harm
correction as indicated above.

comparison in the telegraph office, what effect would it have upon the

 CHRONOLOGY.
science of time"--that is, "the method of measuring or computing time
or moon.

the day and its subdivisions--hours, minutes, seconds--furnish a very
 But for longer periods, extending to
for the most part these longer units have in all ages and among all
 But to this there
 The week is a simple multiple of the day, as
in the changing phases of the moon this is at best doubtful, since it
 If the still
consist of an integral number of days much confusion and
times would have presented fewer pitfalls to the historian than is now
 The month is plainly connected with the motion of the moon
 The year is, of course, based upon the motion of the
produced; although, as commonly employed, it is not quite the same as
orbit.
we have already seen in Chapter V, the year which measures the course of
equinoxes.
which the sun makes from one tropic to the other and back again.

time these natural periods, but in so doing they incurred much the same
English and American money in the ordinary transactions of life.
many dollars make a pound sterling? How shall we make change with
? How much is one unit worth

which existed in his time with regard to the place of months and moons

    But bids us say that she's an ill-used moon
    Shuffle her days and turn them topsy-turvy,
    By your false count are sent home supperless,
"
  [2] Aristophanes, The Clouds, Whewell's translation.

 DAY, MONTH, AND YEAR.
used concurrently, it is necessary to determine how many days are
astronomer the numbers are found to be very awkward and inconvenient for
of the various devices by which ingenious men have sought to use

According to Professor Harkness, for the epoch 1900 A.
--
    One tropical year = 365.

 5h.
 45.

530588 mean solar days.
     "     "          = 29d.
 44m.
8s.

next one--i.
, the time required by the moon to go from conjunction

A very ancient device was to call a year equal to 365 days, and to have
unsatisfactory in more than one way.
artificial calendar would be about one day ahead of the true one, at the
seasons would have appreciably changed their position in the year, April
 So, too, the year
12 months of the average length of 29.
months 383.
from the beginning to the middle and the end of the year within a
 Some peoples gave up the astronomical year as
354 days, which is now in use in certain Mohammedan countries, where it
of the seasons in such a year.
adopted a system of conventional months, such that twelve of them would
months of arbitrary length we are compelled to remember by some such

    April, June, and November;
    Save February,
    Till leap year gives it twenty-nine.

61.
--The foundations of our calendar may fairly be
astronomer Sosigines, adopted the old Egyptian device of a leap year,
years were only 365 days long.
at the first of January, instead of in March, where it had formerly
July.

mythology; those of the later months, September, October, etc.
seventh month, eighth month, represent the places of these months in the
subsequent calendars, for the widest diversity of practice existed
should begin, Christmas, Easter, March 25th, and others having been

The system of leap years introduced by Cæsar makes the average length of
25 days, which differs by about eleven minutes from the true
purposes no better approximation to the true length of the year need be
 But _any_ deviation from the true length, however small, must
equinox, to another part of the year, and the ecclesiastical authorities
since the great Church festival of Easter has its date determined with
became more and more displaced in the calendar, until Pope Gregory XIII,
days were dropped from the calendar, the day after March 11th being
it fell in A.
 325, the time of the Council of Nicæa, which Gregory

The calendar having thus been brought back into agreement with that of
by modifying Cæsar's leap-year rule so that it should run: Every year
whose numbers are divisible by 100 but not divisible by 400.
latter years--e.
, 1900--are counted as common years.
thus altered is called Gregorian to distinguish it from the older,
countries whose Church adhered to Rome; but the Protestant powers were
colonies by act of Parliament in the year 1752, nearly two centuries
 In Russia the Julian calendar has remained in
customary to write the date according to both calendars--e.
, July
country for the adoption of the Gregorian calendar to the complete

The Julian and Gregorian calendars are frequently represented by the
 S.
 S.
historical dates are usually expressed in O.
, it is sometimes
 This


century, and the remainder is to be neglected in the division by 4.
September 3, 1752, O.
, we have
 14
and September 14 is the date fixed by act of Parliament to correspond to
 S.
1492, O.
 What is the corresponding date in the Gregorian calendar?
62.
--A problem similar to the above but more
date of the Gregorian calendar falls--e.
, October 21, 1492.
America, and compare this with the above.

were you born? In the formula for the day of the week why does _q_ have
divisors 4, 100, 400?
For much curious and interesting information about methods of reckoning
Chronology in any good encyclopædia.

]




63.
--Every planet has a shadow which travels
sun, and cutting off from a certain region of space the sunlight which
 For the most part these shadows are invisible,
which shines by reflected sunlight, and, cutting off its supply of
 The
plunge into the shadows cast by their respective planets, and Jupiter
between him and the sun, and casts upon his broad surface a shadow too

But the eclipses of most interest to us are those of the sun and moon,
 In Fig.
_M´_, is shown immersed in the shadow cast by the earth, and therefore
its shadow upon the earth and producing an eclipse of the sun.
mere inspection of the figure we may learn that an eclipse of the sun
 e.
earth and sun--and an eclipse of the moon can occur only at full moon.
Why? Also, the eclipsed moon, _M´_, will present substantially the same
same from North America as from South America--but the eclipsed sun

cut off, producing what is called a total eclipse.
earth's surface near _J_ and _K_ there will be no interference whatever
joining these regions to any part of the sun.
_L_ or _K_ and _L_ the moon will cut off a part of the sun's light, but
as seen from the northern parts of the earth, will be an eclipse of the
hemisphere will be an eclipse of the northern part of the sun.

 33.
]
The moon revolves around the earth in a plane, which, in the figure, we
through the sun along the line _M´ M_ produced.
happens that this plane is turned to one side of the sun, along some
edge of the earth's shadow without being at any time wholly immersed in

In what parts of the earth would this eclipse be visible? What kinds of
the earth would they be visible?
64.
--The shape and position of the earth's shadow are
 33 by the lines drawn tangent to the circles which
the earth interferes with the free radiation of sunlight, and since both
it is evident that the earth's shadow must be, in geometrical language,
right of the figure--in other words, the earth's shadow, although very
 So, too, the shadow of the
from the sun, and, as shown in the figure, just about long enough to

It is easily shown, by the theorem of similar triangles in connection
center of the earth to the vertex of its shadow is always equal to the
the length of the moon's shadow is equal to the distance of the moon
shorter of the two, because the moon is smaller than the earth.
radius of the moon's orbit is just about 1/400th part of the radius of
 e.
1/400th part of the distance of the earth from the sun, and it is this
distance of the moon from the earth which makes the tip of the moon's
 Indeed,
variations in the distance of the moon from the earth, and in
short of reaching the earth, and sometimes even projects considerably
 When the moon's distance is too great for the
eclipse of the sun, for there is no shadow which can fall upon the

_annular_, or ring-shaped, because the moon, although eclipsing the
but leaves the sun's edge visible as a ring of light, which completely
 Although, strictly speaking, this is only a partial
one class, which is called central eclipses, since in these eclipses the
partial eclipses it passes to one side of the earth without striking it.
In this latter case we have to consider another cone called the
 e.
 33 by the
which is the vertex of this cone.
its surface all that region of space within which the moon cuts off any
produces total eclipses.
solar eclipse of some kind, and the nearer the place is to the axis of
 Since the moon
the diameter of the penumbra where it strikes the earth will be about
able to show from this that the region of the earth's surface within
about 2,100 miles on either side of the region where the eclipse is
 Measured along the curved surface of the earth, this distance is

Is it true that if at any time the axis of the shadow cone comes within
those parts of the earth nearest the axis of the shadow?
65.
--One marked
suggested, may be learned from Fig.
 The full moon, _M´_, will be
the time of the eclipse--that is, from the whole night side of the
parts of the day side of the earth upon which the moon's shadow or
 Since the point of the shadow at best but little more
can cover at any one moment is very small, seldom more than 100 to 200
by the shadow that the sun is at any given moment totally eclipsed, but
of the moon, leaving to view only such outlying parts and appendages as
 At a lunar eclipse, on the other
latter, but, curiously enough, does not cut it off so completely that
 The
lines extending, in Fig.
 These
of the earth (edge as seen from sun and moon), passes through it and
feebly illumines the moon's surface with a ruddy light like that often
 Eclipse and sunset alike show that when the
come through most freely, and the attentive observer may often see at a
sunlight into the shadow cone; just before the sun reaches the horizon
diameter is longer than the vertical one (see § 50).

--At a total lunar eclipse what would be the effect upon the
were heavily laden with clouds?
66.
--We may regard the moon's shadow cone as a
direction of the arrowhead (Fig.
line across the face of the earth at the time of total eclipse.
black line is the path of the shadow and marks out those regions within
 If the
sensible width, while, if the moon is nearer, the point of the cone will
across the earth, and this under the most favorable circumstances may
12,000 miles.
of the moon (240,000 miles) and the known interval between consecutive
5 days) that on the average the moon's shadow sweeps past
this motion is from west to east, since that is the direction of the
 The actual velocity with which the moon's
or less than this, since on the one hand when the shadow falls very
shifting of the shadow will be very much greater than the actual motion
revolving upon its axis carries the spectator and the ground upon which
 At the
subtracts about 1,000 miles per hour from the velocity with which the
 It is chiefly on this account, the diminished velocity
in the tropics than in higher latitudes, but even under the most
minutes at any one place, although it may take the shadow several hours

According to Whitmell the greatest possible duration of a total solar
 40s.
occurs near the beginning of July and is visible at a place 5° north of

The duration of a lunar eclipse depends mainly upon the position of the
 If it strikes the shadow
 33, a total eclipse may last for about two
the moon is entering and leaving the earth's shadow.
the shadow at one side of the axis, as at _P_, the total phase of the
totality may be anything from two hours downward.

 34.
]
67.
--To show why the moon
full moon passes by without touching it at all, we resort to Fig.
which represents a part of the orbit of the earth about the sun, with
of its orbit thus marked.
is also shown, with the new moon, _M_, casting its shadow toward the
shadow.
made the observations set forth in Chapter III has learned for himself
 The apparent paths of
other, but are not exactly the same; and since these great circles are
and the moon's orbit, we see that these planes are slightly inclined to
the center of the earth.
and if we suppose the surface of the paper to represent the plane of the
around this line, so that the left side of the orbit lies above and the
 But since the earth's shadow
 e.
full moon of March, _M´_, must have passed below the shadow, and the new
lunar nor a solar eclipse could occur in that month.
of May the earth and moon have reached a position where the line
cones which hide it.
parallel to its original position, while the earth is moving along its
 The full moon will now be very near this line and therefore very
pass through the shadow of the earth and be eclipsed.
moon will cast its shadow in the plane of the ecliptic, and this shadow,
1900.

two positions of the earth in its orbit, diametrically opposite each
the _nodes_ of the lunar orbit.
points of the sky against which the moon's center is projected at the
earth's orbit.
of what precedes into the proposition: Eclipses of either sun or moon
moon's orbit.
each year two seasons, about six months apart, at which times, and at
 Thus in the year 1900 the earth passed
following list of eclipses which occurred in that year shows that all of





68.
--If the earth is exactly at the node at the time of
an eclipse visible within the torrid zone, since this is that part of
 If the earth is near
the plane of the earth's orbit, and its shadow will strike the earth
temperate or frigid zones; or the shadow may even pass entirely above or
eclipse visible near the north or south pole.
the earth may be away from the node and still permit an eclipse is shown







                _Lunar Eclipse Limits_
  If at any full moon the earth is
  Less than 4 days away from a node, a total eclipse is certain.
  Between 4 and 10 days   "  "  "    some kind of eclipse is certain.
  Between 10 and 14 days  "  "  "    a partial eclipse is possible.
  More than 14 days       "  "  "    no eclipse is possible.

conclusions about the frequency with which eclipses occur.

 NUMBER OF ECLIPSES IN A YEAR.
the moon's orbit a new moon must occur at some time during the 2 × 16
is certain, and there must therefore be an eclipse of the sun every time
 But, since there are two
be at least two solar eclipses every year.
On the average, will central or partial eclipses be the more numerous?
A similar line of reasoning will not hold true for eclipses of the moon,
days required by the earth to move past the node from the western to the
 This omission of a full moon while the earth is within
then we have a year with no eclipse of the moon.
the list of eclipses for 1900 that the partial lunar eclipse of June
within the doubtful zone where eclipses may occur and may fail, and
thousandth part of the moon's diameter dipping into the shadow of the
 By so much the year 1900 escaped being an illustration of a year

A partial eclipse of the moon will usually occur about a fortnight
then be within the eclipse limit at the opposite node.
of the sun will always occur about a fortnight before or after a total

[Illustration: FIG.
--The eclipse of May 28, 1900.

 ECLIPSE MAPS.
advance of the more important eclipses, maps showing the trace of the
and ending of the eclipses, as is shown in Fig.
 While the actual
principles involved are simple enough: the straight line passed through
contains little more than a graphical representation of when and where
 Thus in the map, the "Path of
earth, and the width of this path shows that the earth encountered the
 The general direction
presents are for the most part due to unavoidable distortion of the
upon the flat surface of the paper.
Eclipse is the region within which the eclipse was only partial, and the
, Ends at 3h.
the penumbral cone with the surface of the earth at 3 P.
, Greenwich
 These two lines inclose every part of the earth's surface from
moment the partial eclipse was just beginning at every point on the
western edge, while at the center of the penumbra, on the Path of Total
diameter was but little more than 60 miles in length, and within which

The position of the penumbra at other hours is also shown on the map,
earth more obliquely, and from these lines it is easy to obtain the time
estimate by the distance of the place from the Path of Total Eclipse how

Let the student make these "predictions" for Washington, Chicago,

The points in the map marked First Contact, Last Contact, show the
left it.
of the map the Greenwich time of First Contact was 0h.
5m.
Last Contact 5h.
6m.
gives the total duration of the eclipse upon the earth--i.
, 5 hours
1 minutes.

 36.
the twentieth century.
]
71.
--An eclipse map of a different kind is shown in
 36, which represents the shadow paths of all the central eclipses
 D.
the earth north of the south temperate zone.
shows the path of the shadow in a total eclipse, from its beginning, at
eastern end, the little circle near the middle of the line showing the
 The broken lines represent
 This map is one of a series
such eclipse from the year 1200 B.
 to 2160 A.
, a period of more

If we examine the dates of the eclipses shown in this map we shall find
in which those of the year 1900 occurred, but are scattered through all
 This shows at once
 34, does not remain in a fixed
different years the earth reaches the node in different months.
precession has already furnished us an illustration of a similar change,
shifting of the line in which the planes of the equator and ecliptic
the sun's attraction, the line _N´ N´´_ is made to revolve westward,
 34, at the rate of nearly 20° per
year than in the year preceding, and the eclipse season in each year
although there is a good deal of irregularity in the amount of change in

72.
--Before the beginning of the Christian era
eclipses, which is still of interest and value.
method is that if we start with any eclipse whatever--e.
, the eclipse
of 18 years and 10 or 11 days, we shall find another eclipse quite

 36), we find that a total solar
illustrated in Fig.
 This period of 18 years and 11 days is called
every eclipse is repeated after the lapse of a saros, we may find the
in the table of eclipses for 1900 (§ 67), and it is to be especially
character--lunar, solar, partial, total, etc.
may be predicted by a similar reference to those which occurred eighteen
 Consult a file of old almanacs.

little more than 29.
this last number (see § 60) by 223, we shall find for the product
32 days, which is equal to 18 years 11.
leap years included in the 18, or 18 years 10.
leap years is five; and in applying the saros to the prediction of

that the occurrence of an eclipse depends solely upon the relative
eclipse will be repeated as often as these three come back to the
 This happens at the end of every
the length of the year, the length of the lunar month, and the length of
the ecliptic.
periods, every eclipse would be repeated over and over again for
multiple of a year, nor is it an exact multiple of the time required for
which comes at the end of the saros is not a perfect one.
the 223d new moon is in fact about half a day's motion farther west,
eclipse, while very similar, is not precisely the same as before.
another 18 years, at the second repetition, the earth is a day farther
character, etc.
 37, which represents the apparent
the earth at the end of each sixth saros, 108 years, where the upper row
beginning, marked _0_, to the end, _72_.
16, 19 days, are also shown, and all those eclipses which fall between
those between 16 and 19 partial wherever seen, while between 10 and 16
 Compare the figure with the
eclipses commences with a very small eclipse near one pole of the earth.
Gradually increasing for about eleven recurrences, it will become
 Forty or more central eclipses will then
 The series
 The entire duration of the
 A new series commences, on
"
[Illustration: FIG.
--Graphical illustration of the saros.

eclipses; but here, in consequence of the smaller eclipse limits, we
centuries as compared with twelve centuries, which is the average

One further matter connected with the saros deserves attention.
the period of 6,585.
sun the same face upon which the moon's shadow fell at the beginning of
32 of a day gives the
is repeated, and in consequence the eclipse is seen in a different
longitude.
 36 the regions in which the eclipses of 1900

Is this change in the region where the repeated eclipse is visible, true

 USE OF ECLIPSES.
particularly total eclipses of the sun, have been reckoned among the
 In early times and among
amounting to a terror and frenzy, which civilized travelers have not
predictions contained in their almanacs, threatening at the proper time
proof that their threats were not vain.
these feelings of awe have not quite disappeared, but for the most part
with the former feelings of mankind, furnish one of the most striking
human fear and misery into a sense of security and enjoyment.

of the working of natural laws; it is in varying degree an opportunity
 The
research by the blinding glare of the sun's own light, so that a planet
occasional opportunity presented by a total eclipse which shuts off the
for anything and everything which may exist around the sun.
one astronomer has reported the discovery of such planets, and at least
but at the present time most astronomers are very skeptical about the
some reason to believe that an enormous number of little bodies, ranging
unseen and offering to the future problems for investigation.

eclipse has yielded far larger returns, and in the chapter on the sun we
prominences and by the corona, an appendage of the sun which reaches out
eclipse.
opportunity, and reproductions of some of these may be found in Chapter

Annular eclipses and lunar eclipses are of comparatively little
with chronology.
twentieth century, and commonly suppose that the years are reckoned from
observed of old and by the chroniclers have been associated with events
inconsistent with astronomic theory.
it if we assume that our system of dates has its origin four years after
year 4 B.
 A mistake was doubtless made at the time the Christian era
 At many other points the chance record
means of controlling and correcting the dates assigned by the historian





74.
--In previous chapters we have seen that a
which an astronomer makes, and it is worth while to note here that the
fundamentally upon these two instruments.
instrument, a humble member of the family of divided circles, but untold
the construction of a circle so accurately divided that with it angles
degree--i.
, 3,600 times as accurate as the protractor furnishes.

amount of labor and pains, so that it is a far cry from Galileo and his
accurate construction and elaborate provision against disturbing
 Every such timepiece, whether it be of the
clock of a great national observatory, is made up of the same essential
the departments of a well-ordered factory: I.
the pendulum or balance spring, whose oscillations must all be of equal
 II.
when wound, store up the power applied from outside and give it out
 III.
publication department, the dial and hands, which give out the time
 IV.
which connect the other three and serve as a means of transmitting power
 The case of either clock or watch is
industry.
and its good or bad performance makes or mars the credit of the clock.
Beware of meddling with the balance wheel of your watch.

 RADIANT ENERGY.
in practice supplement or displace the simple apparatus hitherto
 Among the most important of these modern instruments are the
these instruments deal with the light which comes from the stars to the
of that light, or, more strictly speaking, we must take account of the
the sun, is translated by our nerves into the two different sensations
 The radiant energy which comes from the stars is not
furnished by any star is so small that it is unable to produce through
vast majority of stars are invisible to the unaided eye; they do not
 A hot
sensations of heat and pressure (weight); but as there is only one brick
through its action upon different nerves the two sensations of light
stream forth radially from everything which has the capacity of emitting
 For the detailed study of radiant energy the student is referred to
principles may be learned through the following simple experiment, which

the circular waves which spread from the place where it enters the
 These waves are a form of radiant energy, but differing from
surface of the water, instead of filling the entire surrounding space.
By varying the size of the bucket, the depth of the water, the weight of
, different kinds of waves, big and little, may be
all its principal characteristics by means of three numbers--viz.
vertical height of the waves from hollow to crest; the distance of one
the water.
propagation; the second is called the wave length; one half of the first
in the theory of light and heat.

entering the water, was carried by the waves from the center to the edge
water extends.
continuous medium through which the waves may travel, and the whole
which serves everywhere as a medium for the transmission of radiant
transmitting in waves the energy furnished to it by the falling bullet.
The student may think of this energy as being transmitted in spherical
flame, an arc lamp, a hot coal, etc.
such systems of waves, and determining by its own physical and chemical

The intensity of any light depends upon the amplitude of the
 By
possible to measure the wave length corresponding to different
 g.
lengths expressed in tenth meters are as follows: A tenth meter is the
 THE NORTHERN CONSTELLATIONS]
The phrase "extreme limit of visible violet" or red used above must be
energy having a wave length less than 3,900 or greater than 7,600 tenth
 Radiant energy, however, exists in waves of both greater and
not subject to the limitations of the human eye--e.
, a common
radiant energy of wave length much greater than 7,600 tenth meters,
shorter wave length than 3,900 tenth meters.

 REFLECTION AND CONDENSATION OF WAVES.
dropping a bullet into a bucket of water meet the sides of the bucket,
the bullet is dropped very near the center of the bucket the reflected
combined action a wave higher than that which was reflected at the walls
 There has been a condensation of energy produced by the
of the wave.
the wave has traveled out and back over the radius of the bucket, and
the paths over which they travel, and the resulting equality of time
 If the bullet were dropped at one side of
condensation of energy?
If the bucket were of elliptical instead of circular cross section and
produced a condensation of reflected energy at the other focus, since
after reflection is equal to the sum of the paths traversed by every
same time.

are special cases under the general principle that such a condensation
the wave front reach it simultaneously, whether by reflection or by some

The student will note that for the sake of greater precision we here
 If in any wave we imagine a line drawn
exactly at the crest, we shall have what is called a wave front, and
any set of drops similarly placed on a wave, constitutes a wave front.

 MIRRORS AND LENSES.
as light and heat may be reflected and condensed precisely as are the
extreme shortness of the wave length in this case the reflecting surface
 A piece of glass hollowed out
deposited upon the hollow surface and carefully polished, is often used

The radiant energy coming from a star or other distant object and
condensed at a point a little in front of the mirror, and there forms an
in the right place, or may be examined through a magnifying glass.
Similarly, an image of the sun, a planet, or a distant terrestrial
the radiant energy proceeding from each and every point in the surface
object.

images (condensation of energy) is a lens which in its simplest form is
cross section, such as is shown at _A B_ in Fig.
 If we suppose _E G
source of radiant energy, such as a star, this wave front will be
in passing through the lens this surface will become warped, since light
_G_, in its onward motion will be retarded by the thick center of the
outer edges of _A B_.
will be transformed into a curved surface whose exact character depends
 By
sphere having its center at the point _F_ and the whole energy of the
is equally distant from all parts of the warped wave front, and
 The distance
is called the focus.
= fireplace) will become painfully apparent to the student if he will
that the focus falls upon his hand.

 38.
]
All the energy transmitted by the lens in the direction _G F_ is
object--e.
, a star, from which the light came--is formed here.
stars situated near the one in question will also send beams of light
concentrated, each in its appropriate place, in the _focal plane_,
and we shall find in this plane a picture of all the stars or other

[Illustration: FIG.
--Essential parts of a reflecting telescope.

 TELESCOPES.
mirror to produce images, and a magnifying glass, called an _eyepiece_,
observer may not stand in his own light, a small mirror is frequently
 39, where the lines
 By
to _F_, where they may be examined from one side through the magnifying

[Illustration: FIG.
--A simple form of refracting telescope.

one in which the images are produced by a lens or combination of lenses
the bending, refraction, produced by the glass upon the direction in
 The customary arrangement of parts in
 40, where the part marked _O_ is
or ocular, as it is sometimes called.

not light of one color only, but a mixture of light of many colors,
others by the glass of which the lens is composed, and in consequence of
single image of a star, but gives a confused jumble of red and yellow
the images made by a good concave mirror.
customary to make the objective of two or more pieces of glass of
Fig.
 The two pieces of glass thus mounted in one frame constitute a
and similarly the lenses composing the eyepiece have a focal plane
in the use of a telescope the eyepiece must be pushed out or in until
 This process,
glass by turning a screw placed between the two tubes, and it must be

79.
--The amount by which a given telescope magnifies
length of the eyepiece, and is equal to the ratio of these two
 Thus in Fig.
plane _F_ is about 16 times as great as the distance of the eyepiece
therefore 16 diameters.
the diameter of any object seen in the telescope looks 16 times as large
that the object appears only one sixteenth as far off.
magnifying power is assumed to be the number of times that the _area_ of
squares of lines, the magnifying power of 16 diameters might be called
 Every large telescope is provided with several eyepieces
a half inches, which are used to furnish different magnifying powers as
instrument.
small ones, but it is seldom advantageous to use with any telescope an
diameter of the objective.

readily understood from the following experiment:
Make a pin hole in a piece of cardboard.
to one eye that you can no longer see the letters distinctly, and then
 The letters which were
the page is brought nearer to the eye than before.
nearer, notice how the letters seem to become larger, solely because
 A pin hole is the simplest kind of a magnifier, and the
experiment; it enables the eye to be brought nearer to the image, and
brought to the image and the higher is the magnifying power.

 THE EQUATORIAL MOUNTING.
modest opera glass which may be carried in the pocket and which requires
roof to shelter it and elaborate machinery to support and direct it
 But for even the largest telescopes this machinery
of the last one, in the small equatorial telescope shown in Fig.
 It
this:
(_a_) A supporting pier or tripod.


(_c_) Another axis at right angles to _b_ and capable of revolving upon

(_d_) The telescope tube attached to _c_ and capable of revolving about

(_e_) Graduated circles attached to _c_ and _b_ to measure the amount by

(_f_) A driving clock so connected with _b_ as to make _c_ (and _d_)
with which the earth turns upon its axis.

 41.
]
[Illustration: FIG.
--Equatorial mounting of the great telescope of
]
Such a support is called an equatorial mounting, and the student should
declination of any star toward which the telescope is directed, and
hour angle and declination of any given star, the telescope will then
 In this way it is easy to find with the
it is then absolutely invisible to the naked eye.
earth about its axis will speedily carry the telescope away from the
telescope toward the west just as fast as the earth's rotation carries
directed toward the star.
 42, which represents the largest and
student pick out and identify the several parts of the mounting above
 A part of the driving clock may be seen within the head of
 In Fig.
of a reflecting telescope.

 43.
Observatory.

apparatus, and then its style of mounting is determined by the
thing, and the remainder of the apparatus is subordinate to it, the
arrangement of the parts is very different in appearance from any of
 Beware of the popular error that an object held close
 The
objective of their telescope, and imagined they were beholding strange
objective could possibly be seen through the telescope.

 PHOTOGRAPHY.
for holding at its focus a specially prepared plate or film.
carries a chemical deposit which is very sensitive to the action of
which the lens forms upon it.
focus of a reflecting telescope, the combination becomes a camera
tendency is strong in nearly every branch of astronomical research to

and is very much used, but some complications occur here on account of
through the objective.
 44 shows such a telescope, or rather two
upon the same equatorial mounting.

 44.
Observatory.

what is called--
82.
--It is a remarkable fact, first investigated by
where extreme accuracy is required the human senses can not be
 The most skillful observers will not agree
instant at which a star crossed the meridian; the most skillful artists

These minor deceptions of the senses are included in the term _personal
observations of any given person require to be corrected by means of

General health, digestion, nerves, fatigue, all influence the personal
eminent of living astronomers has given this description of his habits

rule to abstain for one or two hours before commencing observations from
loaded with food; to abstain from everything which could affect the
abuse of coffee, which I have found to be exceedingly prejudicial to the
"[3] A regimen suggestive of preparation for an

  [3] Schiaparelli, Osservazioni sulle Stelle Doppie.

 VISUAL AND PHOTOGRAPHIC WORK.
and no nerves, and is thus free from many of the sources of error which
possesses other marked advantages, such as rapidity when many stars are
cumulative effect of long exposure of the plate it is possible to
it.
as studying the minute details of a fairly bright object--e.
, the
neither method of observing can exclude the other.
of discordance between the results of photographic and visual
constellation Andromeda, which are given in Chapter XIV.
explanation of these discordances and other similar ones is that the eye
photographic plate responds most strongly to violet light; the
capacity for seeing, and _vice versa_.

 THE SPECTROSCOPE.
counterpart of the telescope.
the former disperses it.
mainly concerned with the direction from which light comes, and the
obstacle to be overcome in its construction.
spectroscope the direction from which the radiant energy comes is of
character of that radiation.
what proportions? What can these colors be made to tell about the nature
some terrestrial source of light, such as an arc lamp, a candle flame,
the spectrum analysis, and, as the name implies, they are solved by
blue light in one place, the yellow in another, the red in still
, and interpreting this array of colors by means of
 Something of this process of
or reflected from a piece of mother-of-pearl, and still more strikingly
sunlight into its component colors and arrange them each in its
 Any of these natural methods of decomposing light
spectroscopes which are used for analyzing the light from feeble
cross section is usually employed to resolve the light into its
of the lens in Fig.

[Illustration: FIG.
--Resolution of light into its component colors.

in Fig.
 Note that the bending of the light from its original course
similar to the bending shown at the edges of a lens and comes from the
 It takes
longer path _1_, _2_, _3_, _4_, of which only the middle section lies in

Not only does the prism bend the beam of light transmitted by it, but it
figure, where the beam at the left of the prism is supposed to be made
the greater deviation imparted to the blue quite separates the colors,
 The compound
other color would be put down at its appropriate place on the screen,
into a sequence of colors, falling upon the screen in the order red,
 The initial letters of
easily remembered.

 46.
]
If the light which is to be examined comes from a star the analysis made
of the star is seen to be drawn out into a band of light, which is
other, with all the colors of the rainbow intervening in proper order
 Such a prism placed in front of the objective of
work with marked success at the Harvard College Observatory.
light to be analyzed comes from an object having an appreciable extent
successfully employed, since each point of the surface will produce its
and confused one with another in a very objectionable manner.
this difficulty there is placed between the prism and the source of
which all the light to be analyzed must pass and must also go through a
 46.
The slit and lens, together with the tube in which they are usually
 By this device a very limited
and lens to the prism and is there resolved into a spectrum, which is in
placed side by side so close as to make practically a continuous ribbon
slit.
shape of the prism and the kind of glass of which it is made, and it may
enhanced by putting two, three, or more prisms in place of the single
 When the amount of light is very great, as in the
slightly the arrangement of the spectroscope and to substitute in place
 e.
fine parallel lines ruled upon its surface at equal intervals, one from
 It is by virtue of such a system of fine parallel grooves that
spectrum of great purity and high dispersion is furnished by a grating
 Fig.
rather crudely, a part of the spectrum of an arc light furnished by such
side, and looking something like a rude ladder.
are the spectra furnished by the incandescent carbons of the lamp, and
between the carbons.
 48 shows a continuation of the same spectra
capable of being photographed.

 47.
electric arc light.

spectroscope that the three spectra are shown distinct from each other
 The purpose of the lens is to make a picture of the
the arc may be brought to one part of the slit, and thus appear in the
other part of the arc.
spectroscope_ while one without the lens is called an _integrating
the radiant energy coming from every part of the source of light, and
distinction of its parts.
telescope, as is often done (see Fig.
make way for it, and the telescope objective takes the part of the
 A camera is frequently combined with such an apparatus
called a _spectrograph_.

 48.
an arc lamp.

 49.
telescope.

 SPECTRUM ANALYSIS.
which the light incident upon it is resolved into its constituent parts
wave lengths, we have now to consider the interpretation which is to be
rely upon the experience of physicists and chemists, from whom we learn

in the atoms and molecules which make up the luminous body from which
impress upon the ether their own peculiarities in the shape of waves of
 We have seen that by varying the
a bucket of water; and as a study of these waves might furnish an index
peculiar to the light which comes from any source may be made to give
 Thus the
which can be duplicated by nothing else, and every other substance gives
number of wave lengths dependent upon the nature and condition of its
 If these molecules are free to behave in their own
of these wave lengths only, and we find in the spectrum a series of
wave lengths, while between these bright lines lie dark spaces showing
lengths.
 47,
carbons of the arc lamp.
packed together under pressure they so interfere with each other as to
by the spectroscope into a continuous ribbon of light with no dark
 47 and 48,
 These two types
down the following principle regarding them:
A discontinuous spectrum, or bright-line spectrum as it is familiarly
crowded together, and therefore the light must come from an incandescent
 A continuous spectrum shows only that the molecules are crowded
transparent and gives no further information.
liquid, or gaseous, but in the latter case the gas must be under

A second principle is: The lines which appear in a spectrum are
 g.
double line in the yellow part of the spectrum at the extreme left in
 47 is produced by sodium vapor in and around the electric arc and
 When by laboratory experiments
may treat the presence of these lines in another spectrum as proof that
source be a white-hot poker in the next room or a star immeasurably
 The evidence that iron is present lies in the nature of the
the way from star to earth.
happening to the source from which it comes--e.
, changing temperature
substance as iron emits, and we must be prepared to find the same
these conditions must be greatly altered in order to produce radical

[Illustration: FIG.
--The chief lines in the spectrum of
--HERSCHEL.

 WAVE LENGTHS.
iron or any other substance, its position in the spectrum--i.
, its
identification of a substance by means of its spectrum it is often
 A
to the presence of many different substances in the source of light, and
lines in the spectrum, confusion and wrong identifications are sure to
 For the measurement of the required wave length a tenth meter
this unit is presented in Fig.
 The accuracy with which some of these
inch! These numerical wave lengths save all necessity for referring to
scientific use are not usually printed in colors.

 ABSORPTION SPECTRA.
importance than either of those above considered, which is well
 50).
continuous spectrum crossed by numerous _dark_ lines due to absorption
its way to the spectroscope.
study of spectra, designated some of the more conspicuous of these lines
still in common use as names for the lines, not only in the spectrum of
 Thus the double line
spectrum as does the double (sodium) line which we have already seen in
and bears a very intimate relation to the dark _D_ line of the solar

The student who has access to colored crayons should color one edge of
 50 in accordance with the lettering there given and, so far as
gradual one, as it is in the rainbow.

 50 is far from being a complete representation of the spectrum of
 Not only does this spectrum extend both to the right and to
of the figure, instead of the seventy-five lines there shown, there are
conspicuous can be shown in such a cut as this.

proper conditions, be made to appear in the spectrum of an arc light,
 51 shows a magnified representation of a small part of such a
 Down the middle of each of
precisely that of the _D_ lines in the spectrum of sunlight, and whose

characteristic light, which, shining through the outer and cooler layers
dark line corresponding exactly in position and wave length to the
temperature at the center of the arc tends to broaden the bright lines
 Similarly the dark lines in the spectrum of the
 50) point to the existence of a surrounding envelope of
kinds of radiant energy which they would themselves emit if
 The resulting dark lines in the spectrum are to be
the bright lines of a discontinuous spectrum, and they may be used to
serve to determine the chemical elements present in the electric arc.
With reference to the mode of their formation, bright-line and dark-line
spectra.

 51.
]
88.
--The sun presents by far the most complex
 50 shows only a small number of the more
 Spectra of stars, _per contra_,
bring out faint details.
of the different kinds of spectra given by starlight, and these are to
 Thus the spectrum of
heavy absorption lines which are known from laboratory experiments to be
 There must therefore be an atmosphere of
 The spectrum of Pollux
a physical condition similar to that of the sun, while the spectrum of α
 In subsequent
types of spectrum.

 THE DOPPLER PRINCIPLE.
analysis is most readily appreciated through the following experiment:
Listen to the whistle of a locomotive rapidly approaching, and observe
passes by and commences to recede.
each successive sound wave has a shorter distance to travel in coming to
waves appear to come in quicker succession, producing a higher note with
whistle were blown with the locomotive at rest.
wave length is increased and the pitch of the note lowered by the
 A similar effect is produced upon the
from which it comes and the instrument which receives it, so that a
line in the spectrum produced by the light, and an increasing distance
distance is produced by motion of the source of light or by motion of

This change of wave length is sometimes described by saying that when a
toward the violet end of the spectrum, and are correspondingly displaced
 The amount of this shifting,
line of sight, but the observations are exceedingly delicate, and it is
precision.
spectroscope light from an artificial source which contains one or more
observed, and the corresponding lines in the spectrum of this light and
exactly match in position, or show, as they sometimes do, a slight
 The
this slipping, which rarely if ever in the case of a moving star amounts
marked _D_ in Fig.
 The spectral lines furnished by the headlight of
displaced by this motion less than one six-thousandth part of the space
powerful spectroscope yet constructed.
have velocities so much greater than a hundred miles per hour that these

90.
--Other instruments of importance to the
meridian-circle; the transit, one form of which is shown in Fig.
the zenith telescope, which furnish refined methods for making
learned to make with plumb line and protractor; the sextant, which is
longitude at sea, by measuring the altitudes of sun and stars above the
measurement of small angles, such as the angular distance between two
is used for measuring the amount of light received from the celestial

[Illustration: FIG.
--A combined transit instrument and zenith
]




91.
--The student who has
in hand data from which much may be learned about the earth's satellite.
Perhaps the most striking feature brought out by them is the motion of
that endless series of changes in shape and brightness--new moon, first
--whose successive stages we represent by the
 From his own observation the student
statements, although the degree of numerical precision contained in some
than he has given to the subject:
A.
in the sky, new moon coming when they are together, and full moon when

[Illustration: THE MOON, ONE DAY AFTER FIRST QUARTER.
made at the Paris Observatory.

 The moon is essentially a round, dark body, giving off no light of
 The proof of this is
sun it looks dark--e.
, at new moon, sun and moon are in nearly the
the side upon which the sun shines is turned away from us.
the earth is in line between sun and moon, and we see, round and
 At other phases, such as the
and a part of its day hemisphere, but in general only that part which
line which forms the boundary--the "ragged edge," or _terminator_, as it

A partial exception to what precedes is found for a few days after new
the whole round disk of the moon may often be seen, a small part of it
by sunlight which fell first upon the earth and was by it reflected back
old moon in the new moon's arms.
 e.
by the sun--usually appears to belong to a sphere of larger radius than
observer, and the effect disappears altogether in a telescope.
any similar effect in the few days before new moon?
C.
same star again in a little more than 27 days (27.
interval between successive new moons--i.
, from the sun around to the
53059).
called a lunar month or _synodical_ month, indicates what we have
during the month, so that it takes the moon an extra two days to
the minute hand of a clock an extra 5 minutes to catch up with the hour

D.
toward the earth, as is shown by the fact that the dark markings which
disk.
boundary line between the illumined and unillumined parts of the moon
moment day from night upon the moon and illustrating by its slow
(29.
lengths as with us.

 53.
]
92.
--The student should compare the results of his
 53, in
from the sun and to represent the direction from the sun of earth and
illustration, any other set would do equally well.
and large, represent the moon revolving about the earth, but having the
 34 (ellipse) transformed by the earth's
 With respect
circle, since the sinuous curve of Fig.
earth's orbit around the sun and is almost identical with it.
clearness of representation the distance between earth and moon in the
the moon's orbit with reference to the sun, we must suppose the moon
earth's orbit is only a tenth part of what it is in the figure.
this is done, the moon's path becomes almost indistinguishable from that
made to show both lines, and it is to be especially noted that this

The phase presented by the moon at different parts of its path is
show why a new moon is associated with June 30th and a full moon with
 What was the date of first quarter? Third quarter?
We may find in Fig.
above in C.
upon its axis three complete revolutions with respect to the sun, but
point toward it at noon on July 3d, since the moon has moved into a new
 Verify this statement by
 53, with the protractor, the moon's angular distance
 When will the meridian overtake

 HARVEST MOON.
meridian past the moon is called a lunar day, and the student should
longer than a solar day--i.
, upon the average each day the moon comes

later each day than on the day before.
irregularity in the retardation of the time of moonrise and moonset,
the horizon at which the moon appears, and between two days this point
the retardation considerably greater or less than its average value.
northern latitudes this effect is particularly marked in the month of
apparent path in the sky, and near the time of full moon in that month
in less degree the same is true for October.
arrangement of moonlight has caused the full moons of these two months

94.
--It has been shown in Chapter I how the
determined by means of angles, and without enlarging upon the details of
2,163 miles in diameter, and distant from the earth on the average about
 But, as we have seen in Chapter VII, this distance
greater, mainly on account of the elliptic shape of the moon's orbit
bodies, such as the sun, which pull the moon to and fro, backward and

From the known diameter of the moon it is a matter of elementary
solid contents.
the earth as the standard of comparison and find that the diameter of
area of its surface is a trifle more than 1/14 that of the earth, and
 So much is pure
enable us to go a step farther and to "weigh" the moon--i.
, determine

We have seen that the moon moves around the sun in a path differing but
 53, with arrows indicating
path were it not for the attraction of the earth, and in less degree of
to the other.
strongly upon the earth as does the earth upon the moon, and if earth
curve in the figure would be just as large as that of the moon.
shown in the figure that the moon does displace the earth from this
the earth and compare it with the displacement suffered by the moon to
 It may be
thrust ahead in the direction of its orbital motion, while at the third
all times it is more or less displaced by this action, so that, in order
moon moving around the earth and make it read, Both earth and moon
 This point is
in ellipses having this center of gravity at their common focus.
this with Kepler's First Law.
of very different size, corresponding to Newton's third law of motion
to move around a large orbit is just equal to the reaction of the moon
 This is
proportional to the masses of the earth and the moon.

sun or to a near planet, such as Mars or Venus, astronomers have
about 5,850 miles, so that the distance of the earth from the center of
240,000-2,925 = 237,075.


mass of the moon--i.
, leaving kind and quality out of account, there
 We may note in this
the diameter of the monthly orbit in which the moon causes it to move,
the body of the earth, about 1,000 miles below the surface.

 DENSITY OF THE MOON.
is made of much the same kind of material which goes to make up the
--and a part of the evidence upon
 By density
volume--i.
, the weight of a bushel or a cubic centimeter of the
 The density of chalk is twice as great as the density of water,
volume of water, and similarly in other cases the density is found by
equal volume of water.

foot of water, it is easy, although a trifle tedious, to compute what
 The
earth ÷ mass of water) is the average density of the material composing
6--i.
, it would
6 water earths to attract as strongly as does the real one.
direct experiment we know that the average density of the principal
showing that the deep-lying central parts of the earth are denser than
bear the weight of all that lies above them and are compressed by it.

its average density is 3.

96.
--This number, 3.
5.
made of lighter stuff than is the body of the earth, and this again is
compress the substance of the moon, is less there than here.
of a cubic yard of rock at the surface of either earth or moon is the
gravitation is for the earth--
    W = k × (m m´) / (3963)^{2};
and for the moon--
    w = k × {m (m´/81)} / (1081)^{2};
from which we find by division--
    w = (W / 81) (3963 / 1081)^{2} = (W / 6) (approximately).

transported to the moon, weigh only one third of a ton, and would have
had upon the earth.
would be still attracted by the earth and would have weight toward the
the moon we mean the force with which the moon attracts it.
allowance for the difference in compression produced by weight, we may
piece of the earth of equal mass set off by itself alone.

 ALBEDO.
the earth is made: it reflects the sunlight in much the same way and to
 The contrast of light and dark areas on the moon's
different substances upon the moon which reflect the sunlight in
 This capacity for reflecting a greater or less
whiteness), and the brilliancy of the full moon might lead one to
of summer cloud which we call thunderheads.
of contrast with the dark background of the sky.
looks pale, and its albedo is, in fact, not very different from that of
Herschel--so that it would be possible to build an artificial moon of
moon.

commonly called the "man in the moon," but, like the images presented by
it.
a rabbit; in Persia, the earth reflected as in a mirror, etc.

 LIBRATIONS.
same face toward the earth, and we have now to modify this statement and
is only approximately true and needs to be limited or added to or
 In general, Nature is too complex to be completely
statement.
 55 we have two photographs of the moon, taken nearly
the left-hand one a little before third quarter.
represent different parts of the moon's surface, but along the ragged
to both pictures may readily be found--e.
, the three rings which form
the cut, and the curved mountain chain just below these.
turned exactly the same face toward us in the two pictures, the distance
the same in both pictures; but careful measurement will show that this
moon is tipped toward us and the lower edge away from us, as if the
turned back a little (about 7°) in order to match perfectly the other

This turning is called a _libration_, and it should be borne in mind
and south, but also at right angles to this, east and west, so that we
than would be possible if it turned toward us at all times exactly the
 But in spite of the librations there remains on the farther
hidden from us, and of whose character we have no direct knowledge,
is visible, despite the fact that some of the books contain quaint
 The continent of South America is just
fair equivalent for all the rest of the moon's surface, both those
whose parts sometimes come into sight and are sometimes hidden.

from our side of it the earth is always visible.
rise and set there as well as here, but to an observer on the moon the
way or the other on account of the libration but running through its
, without ever going
the moon's disk.

 54.
]
99.
--That the moon should librate is by no means so
same face toward the earth.
the moon revolves about an axis as does the earth, but the time required
revolution in its orbit.
turned toward the north, as in Fig.
the larger in such a way that its face shall always look away from the
 In making one revolution in its orbit the head on this small
and when it returns to its initial position the small coin will have
orbit.
figure at the center of its orbit while moving around it.

the small coin at any time moves faster or slower in its orbit than it
the same may happen if the central coin itself shifts into a new
 This is what happens to the moon, for its orbital motion, like
 17), is alternately fast and slow, and in addition
its rotation axis is not exactly perpendicular to the plane of its
by its rotation from one point of view to another, etc.
only in a general way that the rotation upon the axis and motion in the
 In a general way a cable keeps a ship
"librate" about the anchor.

revolution and rotation constitutes a chapter of its history upon which
the mechanism by which it is preserved is simple enough.

latter out of shape (§ 42), so that the particular diameter, which
serves as a handle which the earth lays hold of and pulls down into its
 e.
the center of the earth.
but it may be shown from the law of gravitation that less than a hundred

100.
--Thus far we have considered the moon as a
chiefly because of its relation to it.
than this; it is a world in itself, very different from the earth,
 The most characteristic feature of the
kind can be found upon the moon.
astronomers who studied the moon with telescopes fancied that the large
 55 were bodies of water, and named them
names, although it is long since recognized that these parts of the
 Their dark appearance indicates
the moon, material with a different albedo, just as upon the earth we
from the moon must present similar contrasts of brightness.
these dark patches are almost the only features distinguishable with the
especially along the ragged edge where great numbers of rings can be
craters.
figure shows, they are seen to the best advantage near the
 e.
long shadows cast here by the rising or setting sun bring out the
 Carefully examine Fig.
with reference to these features.

 55.
 Lick
]
Another feature which exists upon both earth and moon, although far less
near the terminator, a little above the center of the moon in both parts
 55.
Lunar Apennines, is by far the most prominent one upon the moon,
 But for the most part the
into ranges, as on the earth.
mountains stretch out into the night side of the moon, their peaks
lowlands are buried in the shadow.

which seem to radiate like spokes from some of the larger craters,
 A
 55, extending from the
but their most perfect development is to be seen at the time of full
moon.

Another and even less conspicuous feature is furnished by the rills,
cracks on the moon's surface, perhaps analogous to the cañons of our

101.
--Fig.
limited portion of the moon near the terminator, but at the edges little
 This is always true; the whole of the moon can
construct from many photographs or drawings a map which shall represent
 Fig.
shows such a map photographed from a relief model of the moon, and
can never be seen simultaneously.
the shape of the craters, which are shown round in the central parts of
moon's edge.
moon's surface, for we look very obliquely at the edge portions, and
moon's radius.

 56.
--After
]
The north and south poles of the moon are at the top and bottom of the
show how much more rugged is the southern hemisphere of the moon than
 It furnishes, too, some indication of how numerous are the

The student should pick out upon the map those features which he has
 55)--the Apennines, Copernicus,
the moon.

 57.
 Photographed by G.
 RITCHEY.

 SIZE OF THE LUNAR FEATURES.
same way as upon a terrestrial map, remembering that near the edges the
and measurements must not be taken in this direction, but may be taken
 Measuring with a millimeter scale, we find on the
1 millimeters.
this into the diameter of the real Copernicus in miles, we measure upon
7 millimeters, and then have

1 : 79.

 The real diameter of Copernicus is a
 At the eastern edge of the moon, opposite the
= sea).
 The large crater to the northwest of the
 Measure its diameter both in the map and
 55), and see how the two results agree.
diameter of this crater, east and west, is very approximately 50 miles.
The great smooth surface to the west of Archimedes is the Mare Imbrium.
Is it larger or smaller than Lake Superior? Fig.
of the Mare Imbrium, and the amount of detail here shown at the bottom
water has been drawn off, if indeed any was ever present.

 58.
 Lick Observatory photographs.

 58 is a representation of the Mare Crisium at a time when night was
show the rugged character of the ring-shaped wall which incloses this

With these pictures of the smoother parts of the moon's surface we may
 59, which shows a region near the north pole of the moon,
 60, giving an early morning view of Archimedes and the
 Note how long and sharp are the shadows.

 59.
surface.
]
103.
--Upon the earth the sun casts no shadows so
 60, because his rays are here scattered
atmosphere (§ 51), so that the place from which direct sunlight is cut
 The shadows
 60 show that upon the moon it must be otherwise, and suggest
utterly insignificant in comparison with that of the earth.
motion around the earth the moon frequently eclipses stars (_occults_ is
in Fig.
atmosphere just before the moon's advancing body cuts it off, and it
slightly different direction (nearer to _B_) than before.
atmosphere refracts the starlight under such circumstances by more than
effect of this kind amounting to even a fraction of a second of arc.
While this hardly justifies the statement sometimes made that the moon
one at all its density is less than a thousandth part of that of the
 Quite in keeping with this absence of an atmosphere
 Its
softness of outline which our atmosphere introduces into all terrestrial

[Illustration: FIG.
--Archimedes and Apennines.
CARPENTER.

 HEIGHT OF THE LUNAR MOUNTAINS.
to the detached mountain peaks, which in Fig.
Apennines into the lunar night.
mountains, and from the photograph we may measure as follows the height
 62
night and day, the horizontal line at the top of the figure representing
illuminates the top of the mountain, _M_, whose height, _h_, is to be
 If we let _R_ stand for the radius of the moon and _s_ for


terminator to the detached mountain peak--to make this equation
the moon--1,081 miles.
of this equation another form, which the student who is expert in

    or  _h_ (feet) = 2.

The distance _s_ must be expressed in miles in all of these equations.
In Fig.
of the Caucasus mountains is 1.
find the height of the mountain to be 1.

[Illustration: FIG.
--Occultations and the moon's atmosphere.

 62.
]
Two things, however, need to be borne in mind in this connection.
earth we measure the heights of mountains _above sea level_, while on
mountain top above the level of that particular point in the terminator,
 So too it is evident from the
top of the particular mountain whose height we have measured, really
therefore the elevation of the lowest point on the mountains to which
 The peak itself may be several hundred feet
peak appears in the lunar morning or disappears in the evening if we are
 Measure the height of
 This is one of
19,000 feet high, is shown in Fig.
Caucasus range.

18,000 feet, and the Leibnitz and Doerfel Mountains, near the south pole
probably the highest peaks on the moon.
the highest mountain on the earth, although the moon is much smaller
anything on the western continent of the earth.

from it with precision, and somewhat more accurate determinations of the
the shadows which they cast, and the depths of craters may also be

105.
--Fig.
idea of the ruggedness of the lunar landscape.
this crater with the following generalizations, which are based upon the

 A crater is a real depression in the surface of the moon, surrounded
region outside, while the bottom of the crater is about an equal

B.
than fifty times their depth.
50 miles, has an average depth of about 4,000 feet below the crest of

[Illustration: FIG.
--A typical lunar crater.
CARPENTER.

 Craters frequently have one or more hills rising within them which,

D.
not have been produced by scooping out material from the center and
of the excavation is greater than the volume of material contained in

106.
--We have gone far enough now to appreciate both the
 They may fairly
different careers, and in the fullness of time find themselves in very
 The most serious point of difference in these
phenomena altogether lacking in the moon.
dew, frost, and hail are all dependent upon the atmosphere and can not
 There can be nothing upon the moon at all like
aspect of the moon's face contrasts sharply with the succession of cloud

The atmosphere is the chief agent in the propagation of sound, and
found upon the surface of the earth.
atmosphere shows that there can be no water or other liquid upon the
envelope which we have seen does not exist.
there can be of course no vegetation or life of any kind upon the moon,

107.
--A characteristic feature of terrestrial
great extremes of temperature to which they and it are subject.
its slow rotation about its axis, a point on the moon receives the solar
unmitigated by any cloud or vaporous covering.
is turned away from the sun and allowed to cool off, radiating into
 It
be much greater under these circumstances than it is with us where
to say nothing of the ocean whose waters serve as a great balance wheel
 Just how hot or how cold the moon becomes
the books.
recent researches of Professor Very, whose experiments lead him to
is high, is probably hotter than boiling water and only the most
and men, beasts, and birds drop dead, can approach a noontide on the
 Only the extreme polar latitudes of
night, when we should have to become troglodytes to preserve ourselves
"
While the night temperature of the moon, even very soon after sunset,
below zero on the Fahrenheit scale, the lowest known temperature upon
 below zero,

Winter and summer are not markedly different upon the moon, since its
about the sun, and the sun never goes far north or south of the moon's
 The month is the one cycle within which all seasonal changes in

108.
--It is evidently idle to look for any such
progress of the seasons or the spread of civilization over the
 But minor changes there may be, and it would seem that the
effect in breaking down and crumbling the sharp peaks and crags which
 For a century past astronomers
crater or the fall of a mountain peak; but while some things of this
has not been altogether conclusive.
question whether changes of this sort large enough to be seen from the
 A crater much less than a mile wide can be seen
has changed in size or shape during a year or a decade, and even if
 Fig.
two views of the crater Archimedes, taken under a morning and an
between the two which proceeds solely from a difference of illumination.
In the presence of such large fictitious changes astronomers are slow to

[Illustration: FIG.
--Archimedes in the lunar morning and
--WEINEK.

sharp-cut features of the moon which continue substantially as they were
the mountains and spreading their substance upon the lowland in an
 Upon
abides to-day much more like its primitive condition than is the earth.

 THE MOON'S INFLUENCE UPON THE EARTH.
belief that in many ways the moon exercises a considerable influence
that crops must be planted and harvested, pigs must be killed, and
 Our common word lunatic
 e.
sleeping.
beliefs, and astronomers everywhere class them with tales of witchcraft,
 For the most part the moon's influence upon
gravitation, chiefly exhibited in the ocean tides.
moon a very small amount of second-hand solar heat and there is also a
within the range of ordinary observation, and we shall not go far wrong
influence upon the earth is either fictitious or too small to be readily





110.
--There is no better
beginning with the lines--
    "I dreamed a dream


extinction.
words of the poet in declaring the earth's dependence upon the sun for
beings.
and consumed, by virtue of the solar energy.
bird, and the human body furnish types of machines run by energy derived
search for kinds of terrestrial energy which are not derived either
 There are a few such, but they are

111.
--To the astronomer the sun
diverse character, but all tending toward the same goal: the framing of
and how it does its work.
numerical determinations of distance, size, mass, density, etc.
we have already encountered in connection with the moon, but which must
distance of the sun makes impossible the resort to any such simple
 It
observing its direction first from one eye, then from the other; too
 In one respect, however, we stand upon a
has already been found (Chapter IV) as a fractional part of the sun's
sun's mass is 329,000 times that of the earth and moon combined, or

If we could rely implicitly upon this number we might make it determine
follows: It was suggested in § 38 that Newton proved Kepler's three laws
little amendment to make them strictly correct, and below we give in the
Newton's amendment of it.





units in which _T_, _a_, _m_, and _M_ are expressed.

  (Newton) a^{3}/T^{2} = k (M + m).

divided by _T^{2}_ always gives the same quotient, _h_; and he did not
note that if the particular _a_ and _T_ which belong to any
 g.
the quotient will be 1.
the quotient, and showed that it is equal to the product obtained by
is always the same when we are dealing with the action of gravitation,
between the earth and a roast of beef in the butcher's scales, provided
distances, and masses.

to much in the motion of the planets.
effect, makes the circuit of his orbit in 4,333 days instead of 4,335,
 But in
us to extend Kepler's law, which relates solely to the sun and its


32^{2}) = k (1 + 1/81),
from which we may find that, with the units here employed, the earth's
the mile as the unit of distance--
    k = 1830 × 10^{10}.

represents the motion of the earth around the sun, we shall have--
    a^{3}/(365.

the mass of the sun is greater than the mass of the earth.
by solving this equation that _a_, the mean distance of the sun from the

113.
--This will be
 17.
earth makes its nearest approach to the orbit of Mars in the month of
distance from the earth will be very much less than the distance of the
which served for the moon.
circles having their centers at the sun this distance between them,
these orbits--
    D = a´´ - a´,
where the accents ´´, ´ represent Mars and the earth respectively.
Kepler's Third Law furnishes the relation--
    (a´´)^{3}/(T´´)^{2} = (a´)^{3}/(T´)^{2};
and since the periodic times of the earth and Mars, _T´_, _T´´_, are
to determine the two unknown quantities, _a´_, _a´´_--i.
, the
 The first of
elliptical shape of the orbits, but this can be allowed for easily

In practice it is found better to apply this method of determining the
observations of Mars, and great interest has been aroused among
which at times comes much closer to the earth than does Mars or any
oppositions furnish a more accurate determination of the sun's distance
 Observations for this purpose are being

Many other methods of measuring the sun's distance have been devised by
one of them has its weak point--e.
, the determination of the mass of
the second method, so that even the best results at present are
instead of relying upon any one method, must use all of them, and take
 According to Professor Harkness, this
this length drawn from the earth toward the sun would end somewhere
side of the center, or exactly at it, no man knows.

 PARALLAX AND DISTANCE.
speak of the sun's parallax, instead of its distance from the earth,
and surface of the earth--i.
, the angle subtended at the sun by a
 The
therefore makes a substitute for the distance which has the advantage of
8, instead of a large one.

comprehend how great is a distance of 93,000,000 miles, but a single one
 To ride 100 miles a day 365 days in the year
the beginning of the Christian era and rode at that rate toward the sun
 D.
reached his destination, although his journey would be about three
 He would have crossed the orbit of Venus about the time

115.
--Knowing the distance of the sun, it
arc) that the length of that diameter is 865,000 miles.
this connection that the diameter of the moon's _orbit_ is only 480,000
abundant room inside the sun, and to spare, for the moon to perform the
 65.

 65.
--YOUNG.

mass and diameter, the student may find from the mass and diameter of
4 times that of water.
This is about the same as the density of gravel or soft coal, and is

We recall that the small density of the moon was accounted for by the
in the case of the sun, for not only is the density less but the force
 The
sun would weigh more than an elephant does here, and would find his
hold him upright.
surface of the sun must be surpassed below the surface, and as it does
of two conclusions: Either the stuff of which the sun is made is
pressure, or there is some opposing influence at work which more than
than the terrestrial.

 MATERIAL OF WHICH THE SUN IS MADE.
alternatives, the spectroscope comes to our aid and shows in the sun's
 50) the characteristic line marked _D_, which we know
terrestrial substance as present in the sun in considerable quantity.
The lines marked _C_ and _F_ are produced by hydrogen, which is one of
_b_ magnesium, etc.
our terrestrial elements, mainly the metallic ones, are present as gases
not found in this way are absent from the sun.
probably are there, but the spectroscopic proof of their presence is
 Professor Rowland, who has been prominent in
the temperature of the sun, its spectrum would probably resemble that of
"
Whatever differences of chemical structure may exist between the sun and
unlike to each other in substance, and we are brought back to the second
gravity and making the substance of the sun light instead of heavy, and

 THE HEAT OF THE SUN.
proof, and it is a familiar fact that heat expands most substances and
 The sun's heat falling upon the earth expands it
imagine this process of expansion continued until the earth's diameter
reduced to a level with that of the sun.
of the earth must be raised to produce this amount of expansion we do
there can be no doubt that heat is the cause of the sun's low density

Before we inquire more closely into the sun's temperature, it will be
temperature, which are often used as if they meant the same thing.
is a form of energy which may be found in varying degree in every
amount of heat--while temperature corresponds to our sensations of warm
body.
 A barrel of
temperature is not so high.
determine not the amount of heat contained in the sun but the sun's
What is the temperature of a locomotive? It is one thing in the fire box
headlight; and so with the sun, its temperature is certainly different

produce by absorption the dark lines of the solar spectrum, and
with our attempts at measuring the temperature of those parts of the

In view of these and other difficulties we need not be surprised that
temperature made by different investigators, who have assigned to it
 to more than 5,000,000° C.
however, improved methods and a better understanding of the problem have
that the temperature of the visible surface of the sun lies somewhere
, say 15,000° of the Fahrenheit scale.

 DETERMINING THE SUN'S TEMPERATURE.
been used for determining this temperature is based upon the principle
gives it off in the form of radiant energy.
whose temperature is lower than 500° C.
whose wave length is greater than 7,600 tenth meters, and is therefore
often detect it as radiant heat.
gives off energy which can be felt as heat but can not be seen.
such a body is further heated it continues to send off the same kinds
to its radiation, and when it begins to emit energy of wave length 7,500
which presently becomes brighter and less ruddy and changes to white as
added to the radiation.
red hot and then white hot, and we thus recognize in a general way that
its temperature.
lengths the higher is the temperature of the radiating body.
the maximum of brilliancy to the eye lies at or near the wave length,
(light included) is estimated to fall somewhere between green and blue
can apply to this wave length Paschen's law--temperature reckoned in
quotient obtained by dividing the number 27,000,000 by the wave length
absolute temperature of the sun's surface 5,400° C.

lower temperatures and longer wave lengths than are here involved, but
temperatures, too great reliance must not be attached to the numerical

[Illustration: FIG.
--The sun, August 11, 1894.
Goodsell Observatory.

 67.
 Photographed at the
]
119.
--A marked contrast exists between the faces of
the sun showing nothing whatever to correspond with the mountains,
 The unaided eye in general finds in the
still water, and even the telescope at first sight seems to show but
 There may usually be found upon the sun's face a certain

smoked glass without the aid of a telescope.
the sun they are quite frequently accompanied, as in Fig.
patches called _faculæ_ (Latin, _facula_ = a little torch), which look a
 So, too, a good
are rather brighter than the edge, as indeed we should expect them to
us that the visible surface of the sun is enveloped by invisible vapors
the edge where it passes through a greater thickness of this envelope
 See Fig.
coming from the edge of the sun to the earth has to traverse a much

[Illustration: FIG.
--The sun, August 18, 1894.
Goodsell Observatory.

 66 to 69, and note
photograph, very much distorted and foreshortened by the curvature of
and are not only more conspicuous but show better their true shape.

 THE EQUATORIAL CONSTELLATIONS]
120.
--The changed position of these spots shows that
spot's motion, and the position of this axis is shown in the figure by a
south in each of the four photographs.
three days has carried the spots from the edge halfway to the center of
two later photographs, that of August 21st showing them just ready to

[Illustration: FIG.
--The sun, August 21, 1894.
Goodsell Observatory.

shown in the other three, and observe whether the path of the spots
 Is there any reason why it


letters _N S_ mark the direction of a north and south line across the
axis, while it is evidently not parallel to the sun's axis.
spots took more than ten days to move across the sun's face, and as at
the sun, it is evident that the period of the sun's rotation is
 It is, in fact, rather more than 25 days,
the sun on September 5th.

 70.
]
121.
--Another significant fact comes out plainly from the
 The spots are not permanent features of the sun's face,
covered by the pictures.
14th and August 18th, where the spots are least distorted by the
 By September 16th this group of spots
largest the group extended more than 80,000 miles in length, and several
been dropped upon them.
 67 determine in miles the length of
 Fig.
as they appeared on August 17th, and in this we find some details not so
 The larger spots consist of a
surrounded by an irregular border called the _penumbra_ (partial
the surrounding parts of the sun.
picture that the nucleus is really black or even dark.
fact, with a brilliancy greater than that of an electric lamp, but the
contrast with it the nucleus and penumbra appear relatively dark.

 71.
 Goodsell
]
[Illustration: FIG.
--Sun spot of March 5, 1873.
New Astronomy.
]
The bright shining surface of the sun, the background for the spots, is
 71 shows,
different from the featureless expanse shown in the earlier pictures.
The photosphere is, in fact, a layer of little clouds with darker
complicated structure, and the way in which, when projected against the
in Fig.
 Note that the little patch in one corner of this picture
spots.

 73.
faculæ upon the sun.
]
[Illustration: FIG.
--Eclipse of July 20, 1878.
]
122.
--We have seen in Fig.
faculæ.
only at the edge of the sun, because elsewhere the background furnished
 It is
break up the sunlight into a spectrum in such a way as to diminish the
faculæ is diminished, and in this way to obtain a photograph of the
photograph, showing faintly the spectral lines, is reproduced in Fig.
73.
across the face of the sun, in two rather irregular belts with a
 This lane lies along the sun's
that faculæ seem to be produced.
with sun spots that the spots occur in these particular zones and are

[Illustration: FIG.
--Eclipse of April 16, 1893.
]
123.
 THE CORONA.
dealing with parts of the sun that may be seen and photographed under
 But outside of and surrounding these parts is
the visible sun.
those times when the brighter central portions of the sun are hidden in

[Illustration: FIG.
--Eclipse of January 21, 1898.
]
Fig.
 75 and 76 are from eclipse
is the halo of soft light called the _corona_, that completely surrounds
the several eclipses here shown, although a large part of these apparent
reproducing an object with outlines so vague as those of the corona.
outline of the corona is so indefinite and its outer portions so faint
greatest extent it reaches out for several millions of miles and fills a

nothing through which comets have been known to force their way around
without having their course influenced or their velocity checked to any
 This would hardly be possible if the density even at
we are able to produce in laboratory experiments.
vacuum should give off so bright a light as the coronal pictures show,
still subjects of dispute among astronomers, although it is generally
reflected from the widely scattered molecules composing the substance of
 It is also probable that in part the light has its origin in
 A curious and at present unconfirmed result announced
corona is not hot_, its effective temperature being lower than that of

[Illustration: FIG.
--Solar prominence of March 25, 1895.
]
124.
--Between the corona and the photosphere there is
because when seen at an eclipse it shines with a brilliant red light
themselves only parts of the chromosphere temporarily thrown above its
remains for a few moments suspended in mid-air.
a fountain foreign matter is swept up by the rush of the water--dirt,
--and in like manner the prominences often carry
faculæ, etc.
their characteristic lines to the spectrum, like that of the
 None
 74 to 76) show the chromosphere,
prominence may be seen near the bottom of Fig.
other parts of the sun's edge.

 78.
--HALE.

 PROMINENCES.
 77 shows upon a larger scale one of these
and another photograph, taken 18 minutes later, but not reproduced here,
280,000 miles.
full sunlight, using the same spectroscopic apparatus which was employed
background without much enfeebling the brilliancy of the prominence
 The dark base from which the prominence seems to spring is not
sunlight.

 78 contains a series of photographs of another prominence taken
shape which are much more nearly typical of the ordinary prominence than
 77.

 79.
prominences.
]
The preceding pictures are from photographs, and with them the student
 79, which is constructed from drawings made at the
 The changes here shown
broken tree trunk, and which appears to be vibrating from one side to
 Such a prominence is
of having been blown out from the sun by something like an explosion,
appears much less agitated, is called by contrast with the other a
 These quiescent prominences are, as a rule, much
 One more picture of prominences
 80) is introduced to show the continuous stretch of chromosphere

[Illustration: FIG.
--Prominences and chromosphere.
]
Prominences are seen only at the edge of the sun, because it is there
at the center of the sun and elsewhere quite as well as at the edge, and
of the sun's surface, but eruptive prominences show a strong tendency
intimately related phenomena.

 THE SUN AS A MACHINE.
the sun, dissecting it into its several parts, and our next step should
other, and their function in carrying on the work of the solar organism,
 The science of
of this kind, but looks to the future for the solution of this the
 Progress has been made
have to consider, the first and most important is the conception of the

In a steam engine coal is burned under the boiler, and its chemical
through steam as a medium, to the engine, which again transforms and
machinery, etc.
of the engine and boiler: it gives out, instead of receiving, radiant
not be run upon nothing at all any more than the engine can run day
 We know that
to the earth in practically unvarying amount, and not to the earth
direction, without apparent regard to either use or economy.
radiant energy given off by the sun, only two parts out of every
small fraction the earth takes about one tenth for the maintenance of
 Astronomers and physicists have
tremendous output of energy is maintained century after century without
conclusion that the gravitative forces which reside in the sun's own
in some small measure re-enforced by minor influences, such as the fall

Every boy who has inflated a bicycle tire with a hand pump knows that
of the air within the cylinder.
expended in working the pump reappears in the heat which warms both air
place of muscular force we must there substitute the tremendous
 "The
stupendous pressure and the enormously high temperature," the one
difference between them: the temperature steadily tends to fall as the
corresponding diminution, and in the long run must gain the upper hand,
 It is this progressive
supplies the energy contained in the sun's output of light and heat.
According to Lord Kelvin, each centimeter of shrinkage in the sun's
something more than an hour, and, on account of the sun's great
without producing any measurable effect in the sun's appearance.

 GASEOUS CONSTITUTION OF THE SUN.
of the maintenance of the sun's heat, which we are here considering,
 In
should be in the main a gaseous body, composed from center to
 Pumping air

The high temperature of the sun itself furnishes sufficient reason for
composing those parts of the sun below the photosphere must be very
with which we are familiar at the earth, since its average density is
behavior must be more like that of honey or tar than that of any gas
 It is worth noting, however, that if a hole
air at the bottom of the hole would be compressed by that above it to a

128.
--It is plain that under the conditions which
into space, must be cooler than the inner central parts, and this
upward and outward from within the sun and counter currents of cooler
 So, too, there must be some
sufficiently to condense its less refractory gases into clouds made up
atmosphere at which the vapor of water condenses into liquid drops which
while above and below is the gaseous atmosphere.
this cloud layer is always present and is that part which we have
 Above the photosphere lies the
chief one, while between photosphere and chromosphere is a thin layer of
photosphere itself, which by absorbing the light given off from the
the solar spectrum.

the photosphere and, carrying with it a certain amount of the metallic
where, parting with its heat, it falls back again upon the photosphere
 It is altogether probable that the corona is
sufficient to carry them to a height of millions of miles, or even
 The matter of the corona
being alternately hurled up from the photosphere and falling back again
quite a different set from those of yesterday or last week.
beyond question that the prominences and faculæ too are produced in some
mechanical explanation of the sun must be worked out along these lines;
explain many other features of the sun's activity of which only a few

129.
--Sun spots come and go, and at best any
two, and more often its duration is a matter of only a few days.
are not equally numerous at all times, but, like swarms of locusts, they
the forces which produced them were of a periodic character alternately
 The effect of this periodic activity since 1870 is
 81, where the horizontal line is a scale of times, and the
number of spots which appeared upon the sun in that year.
very plainly that 1870, 1883, and 1893 were years of great sun-spot

fluctuations in the frequency of sun spots and from these records
showing a succession of waves extending back for many years.

 81.
]
The sun-spot period is the interval of time from the crest or hollow of
this appears to be a little more than eleven years, but is subject to
 In accordance with this period there is drawn in
 81 a predicted continuation of the
 The
expect the actual course of future sun spots to correspond very closely
probably be years of few sun spots, while they will be numerous in 1905,
frequency can not be foretold with any approach to certainty so long as
period.

 81 as accurately as possible the length of the
 It is hard to tell the exact position of a crest or
 Would it do to draw a horizontal line midway
period from its intersections with the curve--e.
, in 1874 and 1885?
[Illustration: FIG.
--Illustrating change of the sun-spot zones.

 THE SUN-SPOT ZONES.
found only in certain zones of latitude upon the sun, and that faculæ
although not strictly confined to them.
peculiarity of these zones which ought to furnish a clew to the sun's
traced out.
are for the most part clustered near the sun's equator.
die out two new groups appear, one north the other south of the sun's
toward a maximum these groups shift their positions more and more toward
vacant lane, which becomes steadily narrower until at the close of the
dimensions, but does not altogether close up even then.
 82 these
means of the horizontal lines; for each year one line in the northern
proportional to the number of spots which appeared in the corresponding
showing the average latitude of the spots in question.
apparent from the figure that during this decade the sun's southern
of spots, and this appears to be generally the case, although the

131.
--Sun spots are certainly less hot
intimate dependence of the earth upon the solar radiation, it would be
should make itself felt in some degree upon the earth, raising and

according to their investigations, appear to run in cycles of eleven
 Abundant and scanty harvests, cyclones, tornadoes, epidemics,
, are among these alleged effects, and it is possible that
sun-spot period, but for the most part astronomers are inclined to hold
really establish a connection of this kind.
the earth and its disturbances, which are called magnetic storms, do
activity, and perhaps there should be added to this the statement that
disturbances and are most frequent at the times of sun-spot maxima.

to things in and near the photosphere, but extends to the outermost
 Determine from Fig.
sun-spot period corresponding to the date of each picture of the corona
present a general agreement in the shape and extent of the corona, while
very differently shaped and much smaller corona.

 THE LAW OF THE SUN'S ROTATION.
the chapter how the time required by the sun to make a complete rotation
a spot or group of spots across its disk, and we have now to add that
different solar latitudes it leads to a very peculiar and extraordinary
 Each particular parallel of latitude has its own period of
there can be no such thing as a fixed geography of the sun's surface.
Every part of it is constantly taking up a new position with respect to
United States this year, southeast of it next year, and at the end of a
us.
always a straight line, or, rather, great circle, upon the surface of
 83 shows what would become of such a meridian
 In the first
sun's disk.
back into view again, after making a complete revolution about the axis,
those in higher latitudes that the meridian will be warped as in the
revolution, as shown in the figure.

 83.
warping a meridian, originally straight.

the sun turns round.
themselves drift with varying speeds across the face of the sun, and
them rather than to the photosphere.
near the poles is hard to say, for the sun spots only extend about
be made to furnish a certain amount of information bearing upon the
also been observed for this purpose.

of hotter and cooler matter between the photosphere and the lower strata
such features as the sun-spot period, the variations in the corona, the
, and we have still
of astronomy, and one upon which both observers and theoretical
 A close watch
total eclipse, and numerous are the ingenious methods which are being
daylight.
pending to explain photosphere, spots and the reversing layer by means
it seems altogether probable, in view of these combined activities, that
be expected in the not distant future.


CHAPTER XI
THE PLANETS

 PLANETS.
attraction, is a family of planets each member of which is, like the
presenting phases; although only two of them, Mercury and Venus, run
quarter--which the moon presents.
grouped about the sun has been considered in Chapter III, and Figs.
and 17 of that chapter may be completed so as to represent all of the
 16 two circles with radii of 7.
4
and Neptune, which are more remote from the sun than Saturn, and by
different sizes, shapes, and positions to represent a group of minor
 It is convenient to
planets, while the remaining 8 larger planets fall naturally into two
Mars--called inner planets by reason of their nearness to the sun; and
much larger and more massive than any planet of the inner group.
in Figs.
 The earth, _E_, is introduced
 85 as a connecting link between the two figures.

moons, technically called satellites, which also shine by reflected
with the law of gravitation, much as the moon moves around the earth.

 84.
]
[Illustration: FIG.
--The outer planets.

 DISTANCES OF THE PLANETS FROM THE SUN.
simple matter to observe these planets year after year as they move
of them requires to make its circuit around the sun--that is, its
periodic times have been ascertained, to use them in connection with

and comparing this with the periodic time and mean distance of the earth

25^{2}),
which when solved gives as the mean distance of Jupiter from the sun,
20 times as distant as the earth.
similar computation for each planet, we shall find that their distances
numbers called Bode's law.
first line of figures below, each of which, after the second, is
off one place of decimals; the resulting number is (approximately) the

determined from Kepler's law, the earth's mean distance from the sun
 With exception of Neptune, the
but most remarkable is the presence in the series of a number, 2.
no planet corresponding to it.
published the law, something more than a century ago, to give new heed
unknown planet moving between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, and a
sky assigned him for that purpose.
an Italian, who found the new planet, by accident, on the first day of
the number 2.

This planet was the first of the asteroids, and in the century that has
no year passes by without several more being added to the number.
some of these are nearer to the sun than is the first one discovered,
represented by the number 2.

Why Bode's law should hold true, or even so nearly true as it does, is
law at all, but only a chance coincidence--an illustration of the
passing strange that it should represent the distance of the asteroids
was published.

 THE PLANETS COMPARED WITH EACH OTHER.
considerations to a study of the individual peculiarities of the
them, and the reason for this is not far to seek.
the outskirts of the solar system, are so remote from us and so feebly
beyond determining the numbers which represent their size, mass,
 The asteroids are so small
indistinguishable in appearance from the fainter stars.
although closer at hand and presenting a disk of considerable size,
account.
less degree; while Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn are comparatively easy
complete, is considerably greater than for the other planets.

 84 and 85 show the relative sizes of the planets composing the
concerning their diameters, masses, densities, etc.
importance in judging of their physical condition.
Saturn, is represented by two circles, of which the outer is drawn
of material that must be subtracted from the interior in order that the
 Note the great difference in
 Saturn, having a mean density
removed, in order that it should float just submerged.

JUPITER
136.
--Commencing our consideration of the individual planets
bulk and mass all the others combined, we have in Fig.
representations of Jupiter and his family of satellites as they may be
 g.
little dots which here represent the satellites are numbered _1_, _2_,
pictures.

reserving them for future consideration, we note that the planet itself
sends to us less than 1/6000 part as much light as the moon.
consideration of the motion of Jupiter and the earth in Fig.
that Jupiter can not present any such phases as does the moon, but that
 As seen from Saturn, what

 THE BELTS.
 86 we detect the most
bands extending across his face parallel to the line of the satellites,
 87 these same dark bands may be recognized amid the

for it we have to rely upon the skill of the artist astronomer.
lettering shows the Pacific Standard time at which the sketches were
center of the planet's disk.

 86.
]
[Illustration: FIG.
--Drawings of Jupiter made at the 36-inch
--KEELER.

comparison of these belts in the second and third pictures of the group,
show that they are subject to considerable changes of form and position
 So, too, by a comparison of such
the indentations in the edges of the belts, we may recognize that the
about which it turns, and poles, an equator, etc.
parallel to the planet's equator; and generalizing from what appears in
each side of the equator with a lighter colored streak between them,
less conspicuous, and less permanent than the two first seen.
the position of the principal belts with the position of the zones of
 A feature of the planet's surface, which
it.
spaces in general white but richly mottled, and streaked with purples,

The drawings show the planet as it appeared in the telescope, inverted,
to appear as upon a terrestrial map.
last picture the great oval spot in the southern hemisphere of Jupiter.
This is a famous marking, known from its color as the _great red spot_,
(1900), sometimes the most conspicuous marking on the planet, at others
indentation which it makes in the southern edge of the belt near it.

 ROTATION AND FLATTENING AT THE POLES.
with respect to Jupiter may be obtained from a careful measurement of
diameter is about one sixteenth part shorter than the equatorial
 The flattening of the earth amounts to only one
numbers finds its explanation in the greater swiftness of Jupiter's
makes the flattening.

this involves a knowledge both of its distance from us and of the angle
kind assign as the equatorial diameter 90,200 miles, and for the polar
 Determine from either of these numbers the size

The earth turns on its axis once in 24 hours but no such definite time
rotation periods in different latitudes--9h.
 in the equatorial belt
 56m.
 There is some

6m.
miles per hour, and thus comes back to the center of the planet, as seen
share in this motion.
hour is a great velocity, but Jupiter is constructed on a colossal
flowing in the ocean, but to a wind blowing in the upper regions of the
 The visible surface of Jupiter is only the top of a
there is anything solid even at the core of the planet.
spot during the first dozen years of its existence, instead of remaining
way around the planet, and having come to a standstill about 1891, it is

139.
--For a better understanding of the physical
evidence which agree in pointing to the conclusion that Jupiter,
character much more like the sun.

_--The formations which we see in Fig.

is their tendency to group themselves along zones of latitude.
measure the light reflected from the planet we find that its albedo is
course greater from the light parts of the disk than from the darker
 The spectroscope shows that the sunlight reflected from these
larger portion of the blue and violet rays has been absorbed out of it,
produced on the earth, and showing that here the light has penetrated
reflection from lower-lying cloud surfaces.
to be regarded as rifts in the clouds, reaching down to some
 The
white clouds on every side of it, year after year, can hardly be a mere
of atmosphere.

_--So, too, the small mean density of the planet, only 1.
times that of water and actually less than the density of the sun,
and clouds, with very little solid matter even at the center; but here
 The
mass and dimensions to be 2.
earth, and the pressure exerted upon its atmosphere by this force ought
the planet.
 88,
increases as we move from its upper strata down toward the surface of
proportional to the distance of the curved line from the straight one
 The line marked _J_ in the same figure shows how the density
Jupiter, and indicates a much greater rate of increase.
the upper surface of the cloud in Jupiter's atmosphere, if we descend,
atmosphere become and how is this to be reconciled with what we know to

of gravity on the other, and the only escape from it lies in the
this heat expands the substance of the planet in spite of the pressure
possibly gaseous at the very center, but in its outer part surrounded by
the cold of outer space.

 88.
Jupiter and the earth.

sun, and we may add, as further points of resemblance between it and
interior of the planet to its cooler surface that is more pronounced in
of maximum and minimum activity, which, curiously enough, seem to
 Of
years that it has been studied with sufficient care, and further
more than an accidental and short-lived coincidence.

_--The temperature of Jupiter must, of course, be much
luminous like the sun's; but below the clouds it is not improbable that
show of probability that a little of its light escapes through the
with which this planet shines.

 THE SATELLITES OF JUPITER.
relation to Jupiter that the moon bears to the earth, revolving about
Kepler's three laws, as do the planets in their courses about the sun.
Observe in Fig.
 _1_ on the four dates,
apparently making a complete revolution in about two days, while No.
moves steadily from left to right during the entire period, and has
the pictures.
 _1_ is
 _4_, and the numbers given to the satellites
 The peculiar way in
line, shows that their orbits must lie nearly in the same plane, and
turned edgewise toward the earth.

discovered with the telescope, having been found by Galileo almost
 D.
 It is quite possible that
recent years reports are current that they have been seen under
telescopic aid is required to show them.
field glass.
however, are rarely used, and, following the custom of astronomers, we

[Illustration: FIG.
--Orbits of Jupiter's satellites.

satellites of Jupiter; but in September, 1892, a fifth one was added to
telescope then extant, found very close to Jupiter a tiny object only
around Jupiter, a permanent member of his system.
fifth satellite, and Fig.
Jupiter, which is here represented on the same scale as the orbits
 The broken line just inside the orbit of I represents the
 The cut shows also the periodic times of the
illustration of the great mass of Jupiter.
farther from Jupiter than is the moon from the earth, but under the
1.
53 days, as does the moon.
from the figure by the method employed in § 111 how much more massive is

Small as these satellites seem in Fig.
considerable size, as appears from Fig.
compared with those of the earth and moon, save that the fifth satellite
 This one is so small as to escape all attempts at
reflects, the period printed with the legend of the figure represents a

[Illustration: FIG.
--Jupiter's satellites compared with the earth
]
Like the moon, each of these satellites may fairly be considered a world
unfortunately, their great distance from us makes it impossible, even
occasional vague markings, which hardly suffice to show the rotations of

One striking feature, however, comes out from a study of their influence
 Their masses and the
expected to find, the density being less than that of the moon, and
 At
less than on the moon, although the moon's density is nearly twice as
for the low density through expansion by great heat, as in the case of
 It has been surmised that these satellites are not
stone, loosely piled together and kept from packing into a solid mass by
 But the explanation
although it is supported by some observations which tend to show that
tidal forces impressed upon them.

 ECLIPSES OF THE SATELLITES.
 89 that in
time pass through his shadow and be eclipsed, and that the shadows of
observer upon Jupiter an eclipse of the sun, but to an observer on the
across the face of the planet.
exactly between the earth and Jupiter, and may be seen projected against
 All of these phenomena are duly predicted
consider here.
and astronomers endeavored to construct a theory of their recurrence
 But in this
on what night an eclipse of a given satellite would occur, and even to
minute agree with the actual time of eclipse until after Roemer, a
trouble.
its orbit toward Jupiter the eclipses really occurred before the
came a few minutes later than the predicted time.
that this was to be explained, not by any influence which the earth
light by which we see the satellite and its eclipse requires an
the earth is far from Jupiter than when it is near.

that he was right, and that on the average the eclipses come 8m.

 18s.
on the opposite side of its orbit.
light takes 8m.
 to cover the distance from the sun to the earth, so
minutes earlier.
by direct experiment the velocity with which light travels--186,337
 (= 8m.
)
 The
the 93,000,000 miles found in Chapter X; but, as noted there, this
good many thousands of miles in error.

the sun's distance which were given in Chapter X involve Kepler's Third
independent of this law, and the agreement of the several results is
soundness of Roemer's explanation of the eclipses.
by comparing the numerical results furnished by two or more different
application and great importance in physical science.

SATURN
142.
--In respect of size and mass Saturn stands next
contains more material than all the remaining planets combined.
unique feature of Saturn which distinguishes it from every other known
astronomers who first studied the planet with a telescope (one of them
correctly understood and described by Huyghens, whose Latin text we
touching it, and making quite an angle with the ecliptic.

 91.
]
Compare with this description Fig.
appearances presented by the ring at different positions of Saturn in
 It was their varying aspects that led Huyghens to insert the
with the plane of the earth's orbit, then at all times the ring must be
group.
 92 shows the sun and the orbit of the earth placed near the
oblique lines representing the plane of the ring, the right end always
 It is evident
the planet is at _N_ and the _S_ side when it is at _S_, as is shown in
 91, while midway between these

[Illustration: FIG.
--Aspects of the ring in their relation to
]
The last occasion of this kind was in October, 1891, and with the large
Saturn without a trace of a ring surrounding it.
that it disappears altogether when turned edgewise.
zodiacal constellations are inserted in Fig.
direction from the sun, and from these we learn that the ring will
constellation Pisces or near the boundary line between Leo and Virgo.
will be broad and show its northern side when Saturn is in Scorpius or
 What

 NATURE OF THE RING.
 91 and 93 that
the other and completely separated by a dark space which, though narrow,
 Also, the inner edge of
_crape ring_.
be inferred from the fact that it escaped notice for more than two
telescopes, and was discovered at the Harvard College Observatory as

Although the rings appear oval in all of the pictures, this is mainly an
planet at their center.
miles, and from this number, by methods already explained (Chapter IX),
the ball of the planet, and the diameter of the ball.
it is evident, from the disappearance of the ring when its edge is
diameter, probably not more than 100 miles thick, although no exact

[Illustration: FIG.
--Saturn.

have held that the rings of Saturn could not possibly be solid or
 The strains impressed upon them by the planet's
and shape.
spectroscope (Doppler's principle) to determine the velocity of the
Kepler's Third Law requires, more rapidly than do the outer parts, thus
that they are made up of separate fragments, each moving about the
close to its neighbors that the whole space reflects the sunlight as
 With this understanding of the rings it
 Like Jupiter, Saturn is greatly
mass about the equator, lays hold of every satellite near the planet and
of the planet's equator and hold it there.
Saturn's equator because each particle is constrained to move there.

usually explained as follows: Saturn is surrounded by a numerous brood
material composing the rings, and the dividing line between the outer
perturbations would have their greatest effect.
between the rings is therefore a narrow lane, 2,400 miles wide, from
of the satellites.
in other parts of the ring, where the perturbations, though less, are
 But it is open to some question whether this

The curious darkness of the inner or crape ring is easily explained.
The particles composing it are not packed together so closely as in the
 Indeed, so sparsely
transparent to the sunlight, as is shown by a recorded observation of
moving through the shadow of the dark ring, but disappeared in total

144.
--The ball of the planet is in most respects a
 With an equatorial diameter of 76,000 miles, a
its density is found to be the least of any planet in the solar system,
70 of the density of water, and about one half as great as is the
 The force of gravity at its surface is only a little
18) than on the earth; and this, in connection with the low
planet must be mainly composed of gases and vapors, very hot within, but

Like Jupiter in another respect, the planet turns very swiftly upon its
it remains unknown whether different parts of the surface have different

145.
--Saturn is attended by a family of nine satellites,
they are exceedingly small and difficult to observe save with a very
 Indeed, the latest one is said to have been discovered
plate, and it has never been _seen_.

bears much the same relation to Saturn that Satellite III bears to
striking, although, of course, the smaller mass of Saturn as compared
greater than that of III.
of Titan so as to determine from the data given above, the time required
around Saturn?
Japetus, the second satellite in point of size, whose distance from
earth, presents the remarkable peculiarity of being always brighter in
when west of Saturn as when east of it.
like our own moon, the satellite turns always the same face toward its
sunlight much better than the other side--i.
, has a higher albedo.
With these two assumptions it is easily seen that the satellite will
east of Saturn, and thus give the observed difference of brightness.

URANUS AND NEPTUNE
146.
--The two remaining large planets are
sun's family.
been touched upon in Chapter IV, and for Uranus we need only note that
some time after the discovery considered it to be only a comet.
the first planet ever discovered, all of its predecessors having been

[Illustration: WILLIAM HERSCHEL (1738-1822).

one feature of special importance.
approximately parallel to the plane of the ecliptic, as do the
perpendicular to the planes of the orbits of both Uranus and the earth.
The one satellite which Neptune possesses has the same peculiarity in
direction opposite to that in which all the planets move around the sun,
angle of 150°.
the direction opposite to that in which they moved before the face was

Both Uranus and Neptune are too distant to allow much detail to be seen
spectra shows that they must possess dense atmospheres quite different
 In respect of density
Saturn, although their density is greater and gravity less than his,
bodies, but cooler and probably more nearly solid than either Jupiter or

Under favorable circumstances Uranus may be seen with the naked eye by
 Neptune is never visible save

147.
--In sharp contrast with the giant planets which
if we count the moon as an independent body, which resemble each other
the great distances separating the outer planets may fairly be described
 Their relative sizes are shown in
 84, together with the numerical data concerning size, mass,
, which we have already found important for the



 94.
--ANTONIADI.

 APPEARANCE.
conspicuous member of this group, and when at its brightest is, with
may be seen with the naked eye in broad daylight if the observer knows
 But its brilliancy is subject to considerable
apparent size of its disk varies for the same reason, as may be seen
 94.
and the student should determine from Fig.
positions in their orbits of the earth and Venus at which the planet
 As a guide to this, observe that the
the angle at Venus between the earth and sun.
Fig.
hemisphere of the planet is dark, and the angle at Venus between earth
 e.
 In Fig.
place on the orbit of Venus from which if lines be drawn to the sun and
 Make a
 94.
two positions is farther from the earth? How do the distances compare
of Venus to-day?
The irregularities in the shading of the illuminated parts of the disk
 94, on account of difficulties of
telescope, and distinct permanent markings upon the planet are wholly
 This absence of markings makes almost impossible a
astronomers are divided in this respect into two parties, one of which
not very different from 24 hours, while the other contends that, like
making a rotation upon its axis in the same period in which it makes a
 The reason why no permanent markings are to be
 Like Jupiter and Saturn, its
ever, see down to the level of its solid parts.
reason here to suppose the interior parts hot and gaseous.
more probable that Venus, like the earth, possesses a solid crust whose
earth, because Venus is nearer the sun.
atmosphere must modify the temperature in some degree, and we have
surface of the planet.

marked brilliancy, since they are an excellent medium for reflecting the
other planet, although Saturn is nearly equal to it.

surrounded by a dense atmosphere, and we have independent evidence of
earth and sun.
stretches more than halfway around the planet's circumference, and shows
atmosphere, thus making the horns of the crescent appear unduly
 This atmosphere is shown by the spectroscope to be not unlike



 CHIEF CHARACTERISTICS.
sun, is at all times a difficult object to observe, and Copernicus, who
have gone to his grave without ever seeing it.
latitude it can usually be seen for about a fortnight at the time of
 e.
sun--and the student should find from Fig.
elongation occurs and look for the planet, shining like a star of the
sunrise, according as the elongation is to the east or west of the sun.
When seen in the morning sky the planet grows brighter day after day
brilliancy as steadily diminishes until the planet is lost.
therefore be looked for in the evening as soon as possible after it

Mercury, as the smallest of the planets, is best compared with the
resembles in other respects.
reflected by the planet in different parts of its orbit show not only
its light changes with the varying phase of the planet in almost exactly
 We may therefore infer
few or no clouds hanging over it, and most probably covered with very
 Like Venus, its rotation period is uncertain,
its axis once in 88 days, and therefore always turns the same face

If such is the case, its climate must be very peculiar: one side roasted
when the planet is at perihelion, is ten times as great as on the moon,
sun, has fallen off to less than half of this.
the planet there must reign perpetual night and perpetual cold,
feebly imitating the rapid change of season which takes place on the day
 This view, however, takes no account of a possible
its orbit, or of the librations which must be produced by the great
entirely destroying the ideal conditions outlined above.

MARS
150.
--The one remaining member of the inner group, Mars, has
newspapers and magazines have announced marvelous things concerning it:
men; that the work of their hands may be seen upon the face of the
are not already sending messages to us, etc.
important, if true, but it rests upon a very slender foundation of

Beginning with facts of which there is no doubt, this ruddy-colored
magnitude, sometimes displays more than tenfold this brilliancy,
especially favorable opportunities for the study of its surface.
explanation of this increase of brilliancy is, of course, that the
from a consideration of Fig.
of August and September.
1894.
 17 the student should determine when the next one will

[Illustration: FIG.
--Mars.
]
Fig.
of close approach to the earth, and shows that its face bears certain
features of the planet.
half of the second drawing was seen and sketched by Huyghens, 1659
 D.
 96 some of these markings are shown much more plainly, but
 95 gives a better idea of their usual appearance in the telescope.

 96.
longitude.
]
151.
--It may be seen readily enough, from a comparison of the
 95, that the planet rotates about an axis,
this respect, turning once in 24h.
 around an axis tipped from being
than is the earth's axis.
is the cause of changing seasons upon the earth, there must be similar
each season is longer there than here in the same proportion that its
 e.
 It is summer in the
in that constellation which is nearest the point of the sky toward which
 But this axis points toward the constellation
Mars.
be summer in the northern hemisphere of Mars when the sun is in Pisces,
hemisphere of Mars when the planet, as seen from the sun, lies in the

152.
--One effect of the changing seasons upon Mars is
 97, where we have a series of drawings of the region about
10th.
 17 that during this time it was summer in the
 Mars crossed the prime radius in 1894 on September
 The striking thing in these pictures is the white spot surrounding
the series, and then disappears altogether.
year later, and like a similar spot at the north pole of the planet it
succession.

 97.
--BARNARD.

 Herschel, who studied these appearances a century ago, compared
around the terrestrial pole, and in the summer melt and shrink, although
 This explanation of the polar
we may draw one interesting conclusion: the temperature upon Mars
of water, as it does in the temperate zones of the earth.
conclusion plunges us into a serious difficulty.
earth is made by the sun, and at the distance of Mars from the sun the
the earth, so that, if Mars is to be kept at the same temperature as the
using it more economically than is done here.
such mechanism, although no one has yet found it, and some astronomers
comparison of the polar caps with snow fields is misleading, and that
more, below zero.

 ATMOSPHERE AND CLIMATE.
of importance.
turned toward the earth, thus showing that the atmosphere contains no
clear and sunny, and presumably much less dense than ours.
in comparing the earth and the moon how important is the service which
those great vicissitudes of temperature to which the moon is subject;
character of the atmosphere of Mars as unfavorable to the maintenance
 Indeed, this
low that vapors can not exist in any considerable quantity, or the
be evaporated.
who look upon the polar caps as true snow fields, which serve as the
 98
dry surface of the planet, vegetation springs up, as shown by the dark

corresponds to the end of May with us, and in the last picture to the
country the luxuriant vegetation of spring is burned out by the
 From this point of view the permanent dark spots are the
a sufficient accumulation of water to support vegetable life.

 98.
seasons.
]
154.
--In Fig.
certain faint dark lines which are generally called canals, and in Plate
narrow, dusky streaks across the face of the planet according to a
 This must not
 No man
representation of things dimly seen.
marked Mare (sea), in accordance with the older view which regarded the
this is now known to be an error in both cases.
planet can not be accurately reproduced upon the flat surface of paper,
"projecting" it which are in use.
with Fig.
equatorial parts of the planet, but enormously exaggerates the region

It is a remarkable feature of the canals that they all begin and end in
lying on the bright parts of the planet.
feature is that while the larger canals are permanent features of the
 e.
canal two parallel ones side by side, lasting for a time and then giving

It is exceedingly difficult to frame any reasonable explanation of these
 The source of the
found in the suggestion frequently made, half in jest and half in
scale vastly exceeding any public works upon the earth, and testifying
 The distinguished
longer than any one else, seems inclined to regard them as water courses
the central channel as water can be supplied from it--a plausible enough
overcome.

 99.
--CERULLI.

 MAP OF MARS (AFTER SCHIAPARELLI)]
155.
--In 1877, one of the times of near approach, Professor
in orbits so small that the nearer one, Phobos, presents the remarkable
planet takes for a rotation about its axis.
makes three revolutions in its orbit while the planet turns once upon
seen from Mars, going from one horizon to the other in a little less
 The other satellite, Deimos, takes a few hours more than a
that it remains continuously above the horizon of any given place upon
through its complete set of phases--new, first quarter, full, etc.
ordinary telescopes these satellites can be seen only under especially
measurement of their size.
been compared with that of Mars and found to be as much inferior to it
their diameters can not much exceed a half dozen miles, unless their



 MINOR PLANETS.
 There are
nineteenth century, and new ones are still found every year.
pretends to remember the names which have been assigned them, and they
order in which they were discovered--e.
, [circle 1] = Ceres,
 For the most part they are little more than
and brighter of them that were first discovered.
four of them--Ceres, Pallas, Juno, and Vesta--compared with the size of
 100.
great majority of them must be much smaller than the smallest of these,

A few of the asteroids present problems of special interest, such as
very eccentric orbit makes it a valuable means for determining the mass
; but these are special cases and the average asteroid
few of them were known, they were regarded with much interest, and the

It was then a favorite speculation that they were in fact fragments of
and Jupiter, but which, by some mischance, had been blown into pieces.
This is now known to be well-nigh impossible, for every fragment which
do move, would be brought back once in every revolution to the place of
this place.

[Illustration: FIG.
--The size of the first four
--BARNARD.

 LIFE ON THE PLANETS.
popular mind, and not without its advocates among professional
beings, and it seems proper at the close of this chapter to inquire
with this belief, and what support, if any, they lend to it.

hard to define in any satisfactory way, and yet standing for something
 It is this idea, our familiar though
 Life, if
life upon the earth, and must at least possess those features which are
 It is an abuse of language to
absolutely unlike, it is not life, whatever else it may be.
form of life found upon the earth has for its physical basis a certain
itself only within a narrow range of temperature, roughly speaking,
considerably overstepped for short periods of time.
protoplasm can be active only in the presence of water, or water vapor,
continued existence and reproduction of life in any place that its
, and

With these conditions before us it is plain that life can not exist in
 It is conceivable that
could not properly be said to live.
condition of high temperature prevails, and probably also in Uranus and
should be the home of life.

considerable atmospheres, and are therefore lacking in the supply of
the asteroids.
planets, which latter, however, we must drop from consideration as being
 On Venus there is an atmosphere probably containing
liquid water should exist upon the surface of this planet and that its
 It would, however,
insist that if such were the case, life would necessarily exist upon the

On Mars we encounter the fundamental difficulty of temperature already
 If in some unknown way the temperature is maintained
forming again with the progress of the seasons, the necessary conditions
the planet might abide and flourish.
the case we have none.

planetary life, for aside from the earth, of all the hundreds of bodies
of life are certainly fulfilled, and only two exist in which there is a





158.
--All of the objects--sun, moon,
citizens of the sky, and we have no reason to suppose that their present
years ago.
appear unexpectedly, are visible for a time, and then vanish and are
 On account of this temporary character the astronomers of
celestial bodies but classed them along with clouds, fogs,
volcano; admitting them to be indeed important as harbingers of evil to

The comet of 1618 A.
 inspired the lines--
    "Eight things there be a Comet brings,
    Wind, Famine, Plague, and Death to Kings,

be taught in all seriousness to peasants and school children.

had shown some of them to be more distant than the moon, that the tide
to the celestial sphere, and in more recent times meteors also have
 A meteor, or
phenomena, and one can hardly watch the sky for an hour on any clear and
which look as if some star had suddenly left its place, dashed swiftly
 It is this misleading

[Illustration: FIG.
--Donati's comet.
]
159.
--Comets are less common and much longer-lived than meteors,
for many months, but never for many years, at a time.
decade there is no year in which less than three comets have appeared,
largest number ever found in one year.
new comet to be found about once in every ten weeks, but for the most
large one, like Donati's comet of 1858 (Fig.
September, 1882, which was visible in broad daylight close beside the

[Illustration: FIG.
--Some famous comets.

 102 the great variety of aspect presented by some of the

Fig.
1893, which appears here as a rather feeble streak of light amid the
 An
of the picture, looking almost like another independent comet.
clean, straight line running diagonally across the picture is the flash
while the comet was being photographed.

is contained in Figs.
the same comet, showing a considerable change in its appearance.
striking feature of Fig.
out into short lines all parallel with each other.
of 2h.
 required to imprint this picture upon the photographic
on account of its orbital motion, and the plate was therefore moved
fall at the same place.
to the stars whose images, drawn out into lines, show the direction in
 e.
moving across the sky.
photographs, but less conspicuously than here on account of their

These pictures all show that one end of the comet is brighter and
bright part the _head_ of the comet, while the brushlike appendage that

[Illustration: FIG.
--Brooks's comet, November 13, 1893.
]
160.
--It is not every comet that has a tail,
 103 the detached piece of
appearance of a tailless comet, a rather large but not very bright star
 The word comet means long-haired or
 Something of this vagueness of outline is found in all
sharp and clean-cut like those of a planet or satellite.
however, there is found in the head of a comet a much more solid
 106,
the center from which its activities radiate.
 106 and
which have the appearance of successive wrappings or halos placed about
connection with the envelopes or in place of them.
show what is quite a common characteristic of large comets, a dark
hollow, a mere shell surrounding empty space.

 104.
--BARNARD.

 106 and 107 is, however, quite
 103 or 104.
Even a great comet when it first appears is not unlike the detached
 103, a faint and roundish patch of foggy light which
tail, nucleus, envelopes, etc.
and finally disappears.

 105.
--BARNARD.

 THE ORBITS OF COMETS.
a theoretical consequence of the law of gravitation, that a body moving
one of the conic sections, ellipse, parabola, or hyperbola, and among
these orbit forms appears, but curiously enough there is not a hyperbola
unaided eye from a parabola, and the ellipses are all so long and
planet orbit, that astronomers are accustomed to look upon the parabola
motion differs much from a parabola as being abnormal and calling for

The fact that comet orbits are parabolas, or differ but little from
of these bodies.
only a short time, because the parabola in which they travel is not a
near the earth and the sun, moves off along a path which ever thereafter
 The
disappearance of tail, nucleus, etc.
from the sun, the highest development and most complex structure being

[Illustration: FIG.
--Head of Coggia's comet, July 13,
--TROUVELOT.

 108 shows the path of the Great Comet of 1882 during the period in
 These
the orbit in which the comet stood at those times.
positions of the earth in its orbit at the beginning of September,
, are marked by the Roman numerals IX, X, XI,
 The line _S V_ shows the direction from the sun to the vernal
comet's orbit intersects the plane of the earth's orbit--i.
, it is
 Since the comet approached the sun
segment which falls to the left of _S_ Ω, lies below (south) of
this plane were opaque is represented by a broken line.

 107.
2, 1858.
]
162.
--There is a theorem of geometry to the
circle, and only one, can be drawn.
theorem of celestial mechanics, that through any three positions of a
comet can move in accordance with the law of gravitation.
section is, of course, its orbit, and at the discovery of a comet
different nights in order to obtain the three positions (right
orbit in which it moves.
is completely ascertained and defined when we know its radius and the
 A parabola is not so simply defined, and five
accurately a comet's path around the sun.
position of the line of nodes and the angle which the orbit plane makes
of the orbit in its plane, and the remaining two, which are of more
approach to the sun (_perihelion passage_) and its distance from the sun
 The date, September 17th, placed
 108, is the former of these elements, while the
from Fig.
82 of the sun's diameter, or, in terms of the
008.

 108.
1882.

 109 shows on a large scale the shape of that part of the orbit near
2/10 of a day, on September 16th and 17th, showing that in less than 10
0 to 17.
more than 240°.
300 miles per second! This very unusual velocity was due to the comet's
 The earth's velocity in its
distance from the sun, provided its orbit is a parabola, may be found
distance--e.
, 300 miles per second equals 19 ÷ √ 0.

[Illustration: FIG.
--Motion of the Great Comet of 1883 in passing
]
Most of the visible comets have their perihelion distances included
occasionally one is found, like the second comet of 1885, whose nearest
halfway out to the orbit of Jupiter; but such a comet must be a very
 There is, however,
the sun without ever coming inside the orbit of Jupiter, or even that of
to be discovered from the earth.
saying, that comets in the sky are as plentiful as fishes in the sea,
according to Kleiber, out of all the comets which enter the solar system

[Illustration: FIG.
--The Great Comet of 1843.

 DIMENSIONS OF COMETS.
 108
 Its
between sun and earth (100,000,000 miles), is made very much too short
 109, but when at its best was probably not inferior to that of
 110.
there is a peculiar and special relationship between these two comets.

diameter of the ball of Saturn--but its nucleus, according to an
 Elkin when it was very near perihelion, was as
 The head of the comet shown in Fig.
to be put in the space between the earth and the moon, and the Great
 From
telescope, comets of all dimensions may be found, but the smaller the
as the earth would probably go unobserved unless it approached very

164.
--There is no known case in which the mass of a
that they are bodies with mass which is attracted by the sun and the
produces perturbations in their motion.
however, too small to be measured, although the corresponding
these mutual perturbations are proportional to the masses of comet and
bodies as the moon or Mercury, the mass of a comet is utterly
mass of the earth.
its hundred million miles of tail out of account and suppose the entire
average density of the head under these circumstances must have been
 In ordinary laboratory practice
 A striking observation made
comet.
 109 that early on that day the comet crossed
sun's disk.
approach the sun, and followed it with their telescopes until the
as they supposed, for no trace of the comet, not even its nucleus, could
 Now, the
densest parts were therefore too attenuated to cut off any perceptible
 In other cases stars have been seen through
in some cases they seem to have been slightly refracted out of their

165.
--Before proceeding further with the study of comets it is
stars.
watch the heavens for an hour and count the meteors visible during that
 Note their paths, the part of the sky where they appear and where
swiftness.
has grown a large and important branch of astronomical science, some

A particular meteor is a local phenomenon seen over only a small part of
travel and be visible over a considerable territory.
December, 1876, swept over the United States from Kansas to
 But the
simultaneous observations made at neighboring places, it makes its
occupies something like a second in moving over its path, and then
a big one comes down to the very surface of the earth with force
handled, weighed, and turned over to the chemist to be analyzed.
pieces thus found show that the big meteors, at least, are masses of
considerable number of other terrestrial substances combined in rather
 But no chemical element not found on the earth has ever

166.
--The swiftness with which the meteors sweep down
velocity, if given to them by some terrestrial volcano or other
return.
bullets, fired against the earth from some outside source and arrested
protect the ground from the bombardment which would otherwise prove in
 The speed of the
motion, and the energy represented by that speed is transformed into
air to incandescence, melts the meteor either wholly or in part, and
cools off as it settles slowly through the lower atmosphere to the
 The heating effect of the air's resistance is proportional to
as 1 mile per second the effect upon the meteor is the same as if it
 Now, the actual velocity of
the corresponding effect of the air in raising its temperature is more
 Small wonder that the meteor is
second.

 THE NUMBER OF METEORS.
evening hours about one meteor every 10 minutes on the average,
 Later
 M.
about three times as many to be seen as in the evening hours.
person can keep a watch upon the whole sky, high and low, in front and
and assigning to each a particular part of the sky, the total number of
 So, too, the observers
which come into the earth's atmosphere within some moderate distance of
atmosphere would require a large number of stations, estimated at
of the earth.
taking 14 as a fair average of the hourly number of meteors to be seen
the total number of meteors encountered by the earth in 24 hours,
 Without laying too much stress upon
the earth every day are to be reckoned by millions, and since they come
through which the earth moves, instead of being empty space, is really a

On the average these individual particles are very small and very far
neighbor is perhaps a fair representation of their average mass and
expected both in the size and in the frequency of the particles.
must be great numbers of them that are too small to make shooting stars
chance across the field of view of a telescope.

 THE ZODIACAL LIGHT is an effect probably due to the reflection of
inside the earth's orbit.
something like the Milky Way, which may be seen in the early evening or
along the ecliptic and following its course for many degrees, possibly
 It may be seen at any season
and autumn mornings.

169.
--But there are other meteors, veritable fireballs in
star.
of February 10, 1896, giving in broad sunlight "a brilliant flash which
like the discharge of a battery of artillery.
 111 shows a large
1894, and which left behind it a luminous trail or cloud visible for

Not infrequently large meteors are found traveling together, two or
the California meteor of October 22, 1896, which is described as triple,
instance, from the year 1830, where within a short space of time some
direction with a whistling noise and displaying in their flight all the

The mass of great meteors such as these must be measured in hundreds if
authenticated, of even larger ones, many tons in weight, having been
 Of meteors which have been
recovered weighs about 500 pounds, but it is only a fragment of the
broken up by collision with the atmosphere.

 111.
]
170.
--Every meteor, big or little, is subject
moving in some kind of orbit having the sun at its focus, the particular
velocity and direction of its motion.
meteor is moving can be determined without serious difficulty from
observers, but the velocity can not be so readily found, since the
 But by
interval of only a tenth of a second between exposures, Dr.
succeeded in showing, in a few cases, that their velocities varied from
this before the meteors encountered the earth's atmosphere.
greater velocity than that of the earth in its orbit, 19 miles per
can be seen at all in the evening hours shows that some of them at least
direction of the earth's motion, the region of sunset and evening is
this region must overtake it by their swifter motion.
fact, the reason why meteors are especially abundant in the morning
catches swift and slow meteors alike, while the rear is pelted only by

A comparison of the relative number of morning and evening meteors makes
velocity of about 26 miles per second, which is very approximately the
the sun.
have the parabola and the elongated ellipse as their characteristic

171.
--There is evident among meteors a
hundreds of millions, to travel together in flocks or swarms, all going
 This gregarious tendency is
unusually abundant meteoric displays, but also by a striking peculiarity
 The meteors all seem to come from a
through which they were introduced, and from which they flow away in
having paths among the stars which, if prolonged backward, would pass
 The cause of this appearance may be understood from Fig.
112, which represents a group of meteors moving together along parallel
 Traveling unseen above the earth until
incandescent and speed on in parallel paths, _1_, _2_, _3_, _4_, _5_,
into luminous streaks that, as is shown by the arrowheads, _b_, _c_,
 e.
the sky whose direction from the observer is parallel to the paths of

[Illustration: FIG.
--Explanation of the radiant of a meteoric
--DENNING.

its radiant.
have short paths, while those remote from it in the sky have longer
 Query: As the night wears on and the stars shift toward the west,
the luminous part of the path of any of these meteors pass across the
possible under any circumstances? Fig.
are grouped around the radiant of a strongly marked shower.
it the meteors which do not belong to this shower.

 113.
also the paths of three meteors which do not belong to this
--DENNING.

which represents an orbit along which a group of meteors moves, and the

 The orbit of the meteors is an ellipse extending out beyond the
orbit of the earth, and the figure shows only that part of it which lies
 The Roman numerals which are placed along the earth's
month, eleventh month, etc.
procession, whose direction of motion is indicated by the arrow heads,
stream and receives the meteor shower when it reaches the intersection
 The long arrow at the left of the figure represents
earth at this point.

 114.
meteors.

what day of the year will the earth meet each of these showers? Will the
earth's orbit? Will these meteors strike the front or the rear of the

each year, there comes a swarm of shooting stars, showing that there
that some are always ready to strike the earth whenever it reaches the
 Such is the explanation of the
meteors are sometimes called Perseids, because their radiant lies in the
showers which are repeated year after year.

 THE LEONIDS.
the Leonids (radiant in Leo) is the most conspicuous type, in which the
some years than in others.
the shower was well observed along the whole eastern coast of North
 The meteors were most
 M.
blot out all traces of the phenomena, for large meteors were seen now
 Within the scope that the eye could contain,

their way across in every point of the compass.
bright, gleaming, and incessant, and they fell thick as the flakes in
" But, so far as is known, none of them
 An illiterate man on the following day remarked:
 I am anxious to see
more stars.

shower upon the plantation negroes: "Upward of a hundred lay prostrate
with their hands upraised, imploring God to save the world and them.
scene was truly awful, for never did rain fall much thicker than the
same.
radiant created much alarm in France, and through the old historic
years, although with many interruptions, to October 12, 902, O.
, when
the face of the sky like rain.

the fact that its meteors, instead of being drawn out into a long
enough to require two or three or four years to pass a given point of
meteors from this source are abundant only in those years in which the
earth.
34 years (it appeared in 1799, 1832-'33, 1866-'67) shows that this is
ellipse, and presumably a long and narrow one.
shown in Fig.
the meteor stream at the point where it cuts through the plane of the
earth there could be no shower; the earth and the meteors would pass by
 Now, the meteors in their motion are subject to
Uranus, which slightly change the meteor orbit, and it seems certain
outside the orbit of the earth, and thus cause a failure of the shower
 The meteors were due at the crossing of
seen, the shower was far from being a brilliant one, and its failure was
from the path in which they had been moving for a century.
will be again switched back so as to produce future showers is at the

173.
--But a far more striking effect of
 115, which shows the relation of
curious chapter in the history of the meteor swarm that has been worked
what actually befell them.
era this flock of meteors came down toward the sun from outer space,
the orbit of Jupiter, and then have sent it off to return no more.
such was not to be its fate.
the year 126 A.
, that planet chanced to be very near at hand and
of their orbit was completely changed into the ellipse shown in the
permanent instead of transient members of the solar system.
perturbations, however, did not end with the year in which the meteors
Jupiter, Saturn, and Uranus have been pulling together upon the orbit,
in the figure, and it is chiefly this shifting of the orbit's position
 D.
meteor shower now come in November instead of in October as it did

[Illustration: FIG.
--Supposed capture of the November meteors by
]
174.
--How closely packed together these
unknown, but it is certain that ever since that time the sun has been
distribute its particles around the orbit, as the Perseids are
to the present the work is only partly done.
meteors have gained so much over the slower moving ones as to have made
so that there is a thin stream of them extending entirely around the
larger part of the meteors still cling together, although drawn out into
some three years to pass through the perihelion of its orbit.
when the earth plunges through this ribbon, as it should in 1899, 1900,

175.
--It appears from the foregoing that
analogy a little further and note that in some instances at least they
an appreciable difference between them is hardly to be found.
comet which was discovered and observed early in the year 1866, moves in
months ahead of the main body of the meteors.
orbit by ten months' motion, _it would be a part of the meteor swarm_.
Similarly, the Perseid meteors have a comet moving in their orbit
of the more conspicuous star showers have comets attending them.

which comes in the latter part of November from the constellation
(after the name of its discoverer) is frequently referred to as the
 This comet, an inconspicuous one moving in an unusually
down to 1846 without presenting anything remarkable in its appearance;
broke in two, and for three months the pieces were watched by
apart as are the earth and moon.
orbit, and six years later came back, with the fragments nearly ten
more disappeared in the distance, never to be seen again, although the
since then.
passed through the place in which the earth stands on November 27th of
orbit on any November 27th, a collision between it and the earth would
 So far as is known, no such collision with the comet has
do encounter the earth on that date, in greater or less abundance in
who look upon them as the final appearance of the _débris_ of a worn-out

176.
--The Biela comet is a specimen of the type which
 e.
ellipses and have correspondingly short periodic times, so that they
 The comets which
--also belong
than a century.
normal parabolic orbit call for some special explanation, and the
meteors and their capture by Uranus.
the attraction of a planet near which it passes.
that the perturbing action of the planet should result in a diminution
velocity which determines the character of the orbit, and anything less
ellipse--i.
, a closed orbit around which the body will revolve time
 We note in Fig.
Leonid swarm encountered Uranus it passed _in front of_ the planet and
thereby.
had it come a little later, and the effect would then have been just the
 Its velocity would have been increased, its orbit changed to a
came into it, thrust out instead of held in by the disturbing planet.
such cases we can expect no record to remain, but the captured comet is
the brand of the planet which slowed down its motion.
 115
the sun) quite close to the orbit of Uranus, and one of its nodes, ℧,
to south side, is also very near to the same orbit.
marks, aphelion and node, which by their position identify Uranus as the
capture is found by working back with their respective periodic times to

Jupiter, by reason of his great mass, is an especially efficient
 116 shows his group of captives, his
 The several orbits are
 Frequently this is
followed--e.
, the name 1886, IV, means the fourth comet to pass
 The other great planets--Saturn,
according to Schulhof, who does not entirely agree with the common
these bodies.

 116.
]
177.
--But there is another kind of comet family, or comet
exemplified by the Great Comet of 1882 and its relatives.
four other comets are known to be traveling in substantially the same
1880, I; 1882, II; 1887, I.
but a very elongated ellipse, whose major axis and corresponding
data, but it certainly extends far beyond the orbit of Neptune, and
in it.
this group of five might be a return of the comet of 1668 brought back
 There is still a possibility of
members of the group are anything other than separate and distinct
 This common orbit suggests
became separated.

discordances among themselves, but if we suppose each comet to move in
several positions at the present time.
sun nearly on line toward the bright star Sirius, and were all of them,
a space not bigger than the sun and distant from the sun about 150 radii
 The great rapidity with which they swept through
by the present extreme slowness of their motions, so that the comets of
an interval of more than two centuries, now stand together near the
greater than the diameter of the moon's orbit, and they will continue

The slowness with which these bodies move when far from the sun is
parabolic orbits takes the place of Kepler's Third Law--viz.


perihelion to any remote part of the orbit, whose distance from the sun
 If the comet of
many years would have been required to reach its present distance from

 RELATION OF COMETS TO THE SOLAR SYSTEM.
illustrate a tendency which is becoming ever more strongly marked.
Because comet orbits are nearly parabolas, it used to be assumed that
that comets have their origin outside the solar system.
and this view is in some degree supported by the fact that these nearly
angles to the plane of the ecliptic instead of lying near it as do the
the comets show no marked tendency to move around their orbits in the
 There is, in fact, the
another.
their movements, but its order is not.

orbits are determined with increasing accuracy, there is a steady gain
and if comets are of extraneous origin we must admit that a very
within the solar system, perhaps not so much by the attraction of the
and swarms along their paths.
comet in this way is shown in Fig.
appears sadly distorted and broken by what is presumed to have been a
 A more famous case of impeded motion is
 This has a periodic
months comes back to perihelion, each time moving in a little smaller
has suffered.

 117.
--BARNARD.

 THE DEVELOPMENT OF A COMET.
upon a meteor swarm tends to break it up into a long stream, and the
presents scant resistance to this force.
analysis of Roche, if the comet stood still the sun's tidal force would
tidal force pulled the moon out of shape (§ 42), and then it would cause
this long diameter.
comets and meteor streams, for it tends to tear the earth and moon to
of their parts are far too great to permit this to be accomplished.

cloud of meteors, or dust particles weighing a gramme each, and placed
by the sun's tidal action if the average distance between the particles
 Now, the earth is far more dense than such a cloud,
the small density of comets, and prepares us in their case for an
sun.
streams out on the side opposite to the sun, and in general points away
 109, and the envelopes and jets rise
 106 will show that the tail
of forces.

substance a repelling force in addition to the attracting force which we
 We think naturally in this connection of the repelling
on a neighboring body, and we note that if both sun and comet carried a
just such a repelling force as seems indicated by the phenomena of
substance of sun and comet, and on the whole would be the controlling
feeble for the big particles and strong for the little ones, since an
whole mass of a body, and the ratio of volume (gravity) to surface
 The repelling
out toward the sun, while it would urge forward those which flowed away
envelopes, the latter being regarded from this standpoint as stunted
 In recent years the Russian astronomer
tails and finds that they fit with mathematical precision to the

180.
--According to Bredichin, a comet's tail is formed by
certain part of its matter is broken up into fine bits, single molecules
the condition of vapor.
these molecules are cast out from the head of the comet and stream away
heavy ones slowly and the light ones faster, much as particles of smoke
trail of smoke is composed of constantly changing particles.
of this process is shown in Fig.
in its orbit on successive days are marked by the Roman numerals, and
_m^{III}_, etc.
thereafter in orbits determined by the combined effect of the sun's
 The comet's
 The line
the sixth day, and shows that all of them are arranged in a tail
 A similar construction for the other
away from the sun.

 118.
]
Only the lightest kind of molecules--e.
, hydrogen--could drift away
 The heavier ones, such as
but they would be more strongly pulled back by the gravitative forces,
comet.
shall recede from the comet only one eighth as fast as in Fig.
note what a different position it gives to the comet's tail.
pointing directly away from the sun, it will be bent strongly to one
Fig.
 But observe that this comet has also a nearly straight tail,
 118.
comet tails, and according to Bredichin there is still another but
comet and sun, and appearing quite short and stubby.
these three types, and their peculiarities of shape and position, are
of different materials.
of the hydrocarbons, and iron, are such that tails composed of these
classified into these three types.
materials--hydrogen, hydrocarbons, and iron--are present in comets, and
theory.

 DISINTEGRATION OF COMETS.
cast off from the comet's head, and although the amount of this matter
 This
and if the comet returns to perihelion time after time, as the periodic
become a serious matter, leading ultimately to the comet's destruction.
It is significant in this connection that the periodic comets are all
considerable dimensions, and it appears probable that they are far
disintegration.
system, making some small fraction of its cloud of cosmic dust, and in
the universe along hyperbolic orbits impressed upon them at the time

But it is not through the tail only that the disintegrating process is
 While Biela's comet is perhaps the most striking instance in
 The Great
away as independent though small comets and other more recent comets
 An even more striking phenomenon was the
half dozen nuclei arranged in line like beads upon a string, and
 See Fig.
series of changes observed in the head of this comet.

 COMETS AND THE SPECTROSCOPE.
long a puzzle, and still retains something of that character, although
 In general it
continuous spectrum due to ordinary sunlight reflected from the comet;
band shown at the middle of Fig.
 These
compounds of hydrogen and carbon, and of course indicate that a part of
incandescent, or at least must contain some incandescent portions.

 119.
1882.
]
By heating hydrocarbons in our laboratories until they become
produced, but the best approximation to it is obtained by passing a
meteors have been placed.
electrical discharge upon a grand scale.
phenomena have been independently brought to our notice in connection
of the physical condition of these objects--for example, a cloud of
of the swarm is very low indeed; the several particles in motion
motion by the sun's tidal action.
charge, which may be of higher or lower tension than that of its
particles approach each other.
effect of the sun's electric charge, which tends to produce a particular
and we may expect to find an endless succession of sparks, tiny
and most vivid when the comet is near the sun, but never strong enough
 Their number is, however, great enough to make
 e.
three bright bands of its spectrum, whose wave lengths show in the comet
oxygen--which chemical analysis finds in the fallen meteor.
be supposed that these are the only chemical elements in the comet, as
 They are the easy
that of the Great Comet of 1882, whose near approach to the sun rendered
bright lines of sodium, iron, etc.

 COLLISIONS.
of a collision between the earth and a comet? finds its answer in the
 There would be a star
pieces which made up the comet's head.
the Biela comet, the shower might even be a very tame one; but a
meteoric display if its head came in contact with the earth.
comet were built of small pieces whose individual weights did not exceed
shield against their attacks, reducing the pieces to harmless dust
the encounter, although the comet might suffer sadly from it.
stones in the comet, meteors too massive to be consumed in their flight
bombardment play sad havoc with parts of the earth's surface, although
life upon it, does not seem probable.
for a collision with a small comet.
an example of what might happen with a larger one.


CHAPTER XIII
THE FIXED STARS

 THE CONSTELLATIONS.
learned to distinguish between wandering stars (planets) and those fixed
shining for the most part with unvarying brilliancy, and presenting the
 Homer and Job and prehistoric
precession, by changing their relation to the pole of the heavens, has
changed in some degree as they grew old with the passing centuries.

 120.
constellations.

primitive times, long before the Christian era, and the crooked and
in Fig.
inheritance from antiquity, confounded and made worse in its descent to
 The boundaries assigned to constellations near the south pole
to the peoples from whom we inherit, was not studied and mapped until
 The old traditions associated with each constellation
suggested by the grouping of the stars: thus Ursa Major is a great bear,
is a lion; Cassiopeia, a lady in a chair; Andromeda, a maiden chained
; but for the most part the resemblances are far-fetched

185.
--"As numerous as the stars of heaven" is a
but as applied to the visible stars of the sky the words convey quite a
every star to be seen may be counted in the course of a few hours, since
atmospheric conditions and the keenness of the individual eye.
own vision by counting the stars of the Pleiades.
and you may possibly find as many as ten or twelve; but however many are
visibility, and doubtless this impression is partly responsible for the
 In fact, much more than
small to be seen, but whose number is so great as to more than make up

The Milky Way is just such a cloud of faint stars, and the student who
not fail to turn it toward the Milky Way and see for himself how that
star.
well as in the Milky Way, are usually called _telescopic_, in
while the other brighter ones are known as _lucid stars_.

 MAGNITUDES.
greater range of brightness than do the lucid ones, and the system of
faintest star visible in the greatest telescope of the present time
already learned, stars on the dividing line between the telescopic and
 To compare the amount of
particularly from the sun and moon, it has been found necessary to
we speak of the sun as having a stellar magnitude represented by the
5.
range from -3 (Venus) to +8 (Neptune).
so bright that negative magnitudes must be used to represent their true
 Sirius, for example, the brightest of the
are of the 0 magnitude.

star of any one magnitude is very approximately 2.
one of the next fainter magnitude, and this ratio furnishes a convenient

5 × 2.
 The full
5^{9} times as bright as Venus, etc.
observed that the number 2.
ratio_ between two consecutive magnitudes.
100^{1/5} = 2.
a difference of five magnitudes gives a hundredfold difference of
 In mathematical symbols, if _B_ represents the ratio of
_n_, then
    B = (100)^{(m-n)/5}
How much brighter is an ordinary first-magnitude star, such as Aldebaran
faintest stars visible in a great telescope would be required to make
put in the sky in order to give an illumination as bright as daylight?

 CLASSIFICATION BY MAGNITUDES.
stars has been carefully measured with an instrument (photometer)
according to the Harvard Photometry, the number of stars in the whole
named in the table:

only 4,326 stars visible to the naked eye.
50 or 60 per cent greater than this, and the normal human eye sees stars
4 or 6.
number and the previous statement, that the sixth magnitude is the limit
precise and accurate a classification into magnitudes which was at first
 This same striving after accuracy leads to
brightness intermediate between whole magnitudes.
stars included between the fifth and sixth magnitudes a certain
1 magnitude, 5.
to the 5.
employed.

magnitudes by subtracting from the last number of the preceding table
number included between each other pair of consecutive magnitudes, as
preceding one by 3, and the approximate agreement of each such number
goes, the fainter stars are approximately three times as numerous as

The magnitudes of the telescopic stars have not yet been measured
principle of a threefold increase for each successive magnitude, we
magnitudes--prodigious numbers which run up into the millions, and even
it is certain that the number of the telescopic stars increases from
 This is balanced
magnitudes still fainter; and applying our formula without regard to
approximation to the total number of stars down to the fifteenth
 The Herschels, father and son, actually counted
and, inferring the character of the whole sky from these samples, we
star visible in their telescope, and included in their count, is rather

How many first-magnitude stars would be needed to give as much light as
0 to 6.
stars are required to give the same amount of light?
To the modern man it seems natural to ascribe the different brilliancies
case 2,000 years ago, when each fixed star was commonly thought to be
same distance from us, as it turned about the earth.
from this erroneous idea and learning to think of the sky itself as only
distances beyond, it was easy to fall into the opposite error and to
pebbles on the beach, scattered throughout space with some rough degree
measure stars near at hand and stars far off, each shining with a luster

188.
--Now, in order to separate the true from
knowledge of their real distances from the earth, and in seeking it we
whole range of observational astronomy.
 121, the
different from those employed in determining the moon's distance from
 Thus, the ellipse at the left of the figure represents the
year.
lines drawn through _A_ and prolonged to the background apparently
 A similar construction is made for the star _B_,
observer as he moves around the earth's orbit, both _A_ and _B_ will
earth as seen from the star, but having their size dependent upon the
_B_, because _A_ is nearer the earth.
between _A_ and _B_ at opposite seasons of the year (e.
, the angles
--B_, and _A--July--B_) the astronomer determines from the
thus concludes how much nearer is _A_ than _B_.
between the January and July angles is equal to the difference between
orbit, and if _B_ were so far away that the angle _Jan.
nothing at all we should get immediately from the observations the angle
--A--July_, which would suffice to determine the stars' distance.
Supposing the diameter of the earth's orbit and the angle at _A_ to be
distance of _A_ from the earth?
[Illustration: FIG.
--Determining a star's parallax.

 e.
1/2 (_Jan.
commonly used by astronomers as a measure of the star's distance instead
orbit.
orbit divided by the parallax, in seconds of arc, and multiplied by the

A weak point of this method of measuring stellar distances is that it
 e.
between the parallaxes of _A_ and _B_; and while it is customary to
it may happen, and sometimes does happen, that these comparison stars as
parallax--i.
, the difference between the angles at _A_ and _B_ proves

The first really successful determinations of stellar parallax were made
distances of perhaps 100 stars have been measured with some degree of
great as 1''--that it is extremely difficult to avoid falling into
equivalent to finding the distance of an object more than 5 miles away
 Too short a

189.
--The distances of the sun's nearer
 122, where the two circles
respectively to 1,000,000 and 2,000,000 times the distance between earth
 In the figure the direction of each star from the sun
the outer circle; the true direction of the star from the sun can not,
found by elevating or depressing the star from the surface of the paper
shown in the fifth column of the following table,
                       _The Sun's Nearest Neighbors_
--The radius of the inner circle in Fig.
times the earth's distance from the sun, is a convenient unit in which
distances of the stars from the sun are expressed in terms of this
 To express them in miles the numbers in the table must be
 The nearest star, α Centauri, is
 But there is another unit in more common
 e.
year.
 18s.
come from the sun to the earth, and it is a simple matter to find from
of the earth's orbit.
distance of the same star, α Centauri, expressed in terms of this
26 years--i.
, it takes light that long to come from the

In Fig.
size of the dots--the bigger the dot the brighter the star--and a mere
light years from the sun bright stars and faint ones are mixed up
member of this swarm of stars, whose distances apart, each from its
separate the sun from the three or four stars nearest it.

 122 is not to be supposed complete.
found whose distance from the sun is less than 2,000,000 radii of the
more than double or perhaps treble the number here shown.
majority of the stars lie far beyond the limits of the figure.

 PROPER MOTIONS.
for their mutual attractions to have much influence one upon another,
free to keep unchanged its state of rest or motion with unvarying
 Their very name, _fixed stars_, implies
 Hipparchus (125
 C.
 D.
among the stars, in order to give to future generations a means of
resulting change in their relative positions upon the sky.
they found at the beginning of the Christian era that the four stars,
 e.
upon a great circle of the sky.
sky, and see how nearly these stars have kept the same position for
 Three of them may be identified from the star
Capella and the other two.

Spica, δ Corvi and γ Corvi; α Libræ, Arcturus and ζ Ursæ Majoris.
Arcturus does not now fit very well to these alignments, and nearly two
grounds suspected to have changed its place in the sky since the days of
 This discovery, long since fully confirmed, gave a great
declinations of the stars, with a view to finding other cases of what
 e.
star as contrasted with the change of right ascension and declination

Since the middle of the eighteenth century there have been made many
star charts and star catalogues, and which are now being supplemented by
upon photographic plates the position and magnitude of every star in the
determining all their proper motions.

remote future, but sufficient progress in determining these motions has
lucid star possesses some proper motion, although in most cases it is
to so much as 1" per annum--i.
, a rate of motion across the sky which
from us by so much as the moon's angular diameter.
proper motion is that of a telescopic star midway between the equator
per annum, and the next greatest is that of another telescopic star, in
 28 of Fig.
 It is not until we reach the tenth
star, No.
 122.
the stars with large proper motions are precisely the ones shown in Fig.
122, which is designed to show stars near the earth.
between nearness and rapidity of proper motions is indeed what we should
its orbit will produce a larger angular displacement, proper motion, the
selecting the stars to be observed for parallax, the proper motion being

192.
--We have already seen reason for thinking
and from a study of proper motions, particularly their directions across
south, east, and west--so that some of them are doubtless directed
and star; while the vast majority occupy some position intermediate
 Now, our relation to these real motions of the stars
 112, where the observer finds in some of the
nothing of their rapid approach to him, while others appear to stand
their fellows.
respect, that its proper motion is only that part of its real motion
supplemented by that other part of the motion which lies parallel to the
orbit.

 123.
determined by the spectroscope.
]
193.
--It is only within the last 25 years
stellar motions of approach or recession, but within that time much
study of stellar spectra, and at the present time nearly every great
 The shifting
the spectrum indicates with certainty the approach or recession of the
star's spectrum with that of some artificial light showing corresponding
of extreme difficulty, as may be seen from Fig.
 This cut shows
lengths 4,450 and 4,600 tenth meters, while above and below are the
passed through the same spectroscope and was photographed upon the same
 This comparison spectrum is, as it should
is a continuous one, broken only by dark gaps or lines, many of which
 But a certain
line is always pushed a very little toward the direction of shorter wave
 This spectrum
motion in the line of sight, and with it there should be compared Figs.
124 and 125, which show in the upper part of each a photograph obtained
some prisms placed just in front of the telescope.
each figure shows an enlargement of the original photograph, bringing
 In the enlarged
earth in its orbit would be represented by a shifting of 0.
millimeter in the position of the broad, hazy lines.

 124.
--PICKERING.

above, very satisfactory results are now obtained, and from them it is
order of magnitude as the velocities of the planets in their orbits,
miles per hour--which latter velocity, according to Campbell, is the

The student should not fail to note one important difference between
are given directly in miles per second, or per hour, while the former
direct comparison between the two until by means of the known distances
measure.
proper motion, and motion in the line of sight are intimately related
motions of the stars.

 125.
--PICKERING.

 STAR DRIFT.
together is furnished by some of the stars--which make up the Great
long been known to point in nearly the same direction across the sky and
 More recently it has been found that these
velocity--18 miles per second.
Majoris, shares in the common proper motion, but its velocity in the
 These
together through space along parallel lines; and on the supposition
equations which shall involve their known proper motions and motions in
direction and velocity of their real motion along their orbits.
these equations for the values of the unknown quantities, it is found
edgewise toward us, and that in this plane they are moving about twice
represented by a parallax of less than 0.
 e.
as the outermost circle in Fig.
 A most extraordinary system of
the whole breadth of Fig.
is difficult to regard as the result of chance, and for which it is

[Illustration: FIG.
--The Great Dipper, past, present, and future.

must ultimately part company with the other five, to the complete
 Fig.
shape, the upper part of the figure (_a_) showing these seven stars as
section (_c_) shows their position for an equally remote epoch in the
 There is no resemblance to a dipper in either of these
α and η keep their relative position unaltered, and the other five stars
changing positions of these two groups with respect to each other.

drift_, and quite a number of cases of it are found in different parts
 The Pleiades are perhaps the most conspicuous one, for here
paths.
in this cluster show that one of the lucid stars and four or five of the
considered as members of the group, but rather as isolated stars which,
farther off, since their proper motions are smaller.

alter the constellations, the student should bear in mind that the
 126 to the next
accumulated for a period of 200,000 years.
move in straight paths for so long a time?
195.
--Another and even more interesting application of
from them of the sun's orbit among the stars.
simple enough.
the earth and the other planets year after year into new regions of
star in the sky save those which happen to be exactly on the line of the
motion of approach or recession along the line of sight.
own orbital motions are concerned, there is no reason to suppose that
when we find in their proper motions a distinct tendency to radiate from
point on the opposite side of the sky, we infer that this does not come
the course of the sun among them.
line pointing toward Vega, and that at least a part of the velocities
of the sun and earth.
sun is moving through space with a velocity of 11 miles per second,
per second.

 DISTANCE OF SIRIAN AND SOLAR STARS.
motion of the sun with the average proper motions of the stars of
distance from us of a first-magnitude star or a sixth-magnitude star,
particular star, does show that on the whole the fainter stars are more
 But here a broad distinction must be drawn.
part of the stars belong to one of two well-marked classes, called
from each other by the kind of spectrum they furnish.
Aurigæ belongs to the Sirian class, as does every other star which has a
 124, while Pollux is a solar star presenting
 125 a spectrum like that of the sun, as do the other stars of

Two thirds of the sun's near neighbors, shown in Fig.
of the solar type, and in general stars of this class are nearer to us
 The average
represented by the outer circle in Fig.
distance of the sun from the earth; while the corresponding distance for
4,600,000.

first magnitude, a fifth-magnitude star four times as far off, etc.
each additional two magnitudes doubling the average distance of the
although beyond this limit we have no certain knowledge.
way, the naked eye sees many Sirian stars which _may_ have "gone out"
them left those stars before the discovery of America by Columbus.
the student of mathematical tastes we note that the results of Kapteyn's
(_m_) may be put into two equations:
    For Solar Stars, D = 23 × 2^{m/2}
    For Sirian Stars, D = 52 × 2^{m/2}
where the coefficients 23 and 52 are expressed in light years.
a time is required for light to come from an average solar star of the

 CONSEQUENCES OF STELLAR DISTANCE.
to us from any luminous body varies inversely as the square of its
us quite rapidly, it must be that with the lapse of time they will grow
 But the
the line of sight would require more than 1,000 years (probably several

The law in accordance with which this change of brilliancy takes place
produce a change of five magnitudes in the brightness of the object, and
 If it
third-magnitude star, how would its light compare with that of the
is, as we have seen above, 4,000,000 times the sun's distance from the
6}, we find that at this distance the
6 × 5 magnitudes, and
5 + 33.
5--i.
, the sun if removed to the
reduced to the very limit of naked-eye visibility.
relatively small and feeble as compared with the brightness of the
 It is only its close proximity to us that makes the sun

The fixed stars may have planets circling around them, but an
prospect of ever seeing them in a telescope.
neighbor, α Centauri, were attended by a planet like Jupiter, this
twenty-second magnitude--i.
, it would be absolutely invisible, and
though its bulk were increased to equal that of the sun.
make the computation leading to this result, assuming the stellar
7.

 DOUBLE STARS.
is the fourth-magnitude star θ Tauri, which can readily be seen to
 The star α Capricorni is plainly
with Vega make a small equilateral triangle, is also a double star.
Look for them in the sky.

applied to the first two of these objects, since it is usually
small that in the telescope they appear much as do the stars named above
 e.
seconds or fractions of a single second, instead of the six minutes
 There are
some are only optically double--i.
, two stars nearly on line with the
really what they seem, stars near each other, and in many cases near
 These are called _binary_
set forth in Chapter IV hold true, and we may expect to find each
having its focus at the common center of gravity of the two stars.
We are thus presented with problems of orbital motion quite similar
observations are required year after year to fix the relative positions
 e.
to call their _distance_, and their direction one from the other, which

199.
--The sun's nearest neighbor, α Centauri, is
by successive generations of astronomers for more than a century, and
 127 shows the result of plotting their observations.
that lies on or near the circumference of the long ellipse stands for
the brighter one, which is represented by the small circle at the
 It appears from the figure
as a planet goes around the sun, and the true orbit must therefore be
stars.
but probably smaller size, since the dimensions of the two orbits are
customary to neglect this motion of the larger star and to give to the
of the two real orbits.

one orbit do the work of two.

 127.
--SEE.

 127 the bright star does not fall anywhere near the focus of the
figure does not show the true shape of the orbit, which is certainly
its plane.
just how much and in what direction that plane should be turned in order
star, and thus give the true shape and size of the orbit.
 128
earth, and the small star, which really moves in an ellipse like that
line drawn through the principal star, as shown at the left of the

In the case of α Centauri the true orbit proves to have a major
the earth from the sun.
between the orbits of Uranus and Neptune, and the periodic time of the

[Illustration: FIG.
--Apparent orbit and real orbit of the double
--SEE.

 MASSES OF DOUBLE STARS.
Law in the form given it at page 179, we shall find--
    a^3 / T^2 = (23.

 We have already
are measured in terms of the sun's mass taken as unity, and when _T_ and
and with this value of _k_ we may readily find from the above equation,
5--i.
, the combined mass of the two components of
 It is

angular measure, 35" in this case, and it is only when the parallax of
units, radii of the earth's orbit, by dividing the angular major axis by
75".

times and major axes have been fairly well determined, and we find in
of double stars and the size of the orbits in which they move:
The orbit of Uranus, diameter = 38, and Neptune, diameter = 60, are of
are nearly circular, while in every case the double stars show a
orbits.
seems to stand in some relation to their periodic times, for, on the
revolution the more eccentric is its orbit likely to prove.

closer relation to the periodic time, is the major axis; the smaller the
the periodic time, so that astronomers in search of interesting
distance apart is so small that they can barely be distinguished one

Although the half-dozen stars contained in the table all have orbits of
which Uranus and Neptune move, this is by no means true of all the
not thousands of years, while a few complete their orbital revolutions

201.
--Procyon, the next to the last star of the preceding
and orbit stands upon a rather different basis from that of the other
 More than half a century ago it was discovered that its proper
but presented a series of loops like those marked out by a bright point
 The hub may move straight
down, and, while sharing in the forward motion of the hub, runs
motion of Procyon and of Sirius as well.
not hesitate to apply the laws of motion, and to affirm that this
companion, which produced upon the motions of Sirius and Procyon just
stars.
astronomer's domain, and its discoverer boldly suggested the possible
 "That countless stars are visible is clearly no
" "There
bodies.
1862 that, in the testing of a new and powerful telescope just built, a
seen.
more recent date (November, 1896), when it was detected with the great
 This discovery is so recent that the
variations in the proper motion of the star, and while the periodic time
orbit may require considerable correction.

about twelve magnitudes fainter than the star itself.
light does the bright star give than its faint companion? Despite the
question, the mass of Sirius is only about twice as great as that of its

The visual discovery of the companions to Sirius and Procyon removes
although their existence is indicated by variable proper motions or by
of the components of a triple star moves around the other two in a
never yet been seen.

 MULTIPLE STARS.
to each other, like ζ Cancri, are called multiple stars, and
considerable number of them in the sky, 100 or more as against the more
 That their relative motions are
mathematical analysis breaks down in face of the difficulties here
be the general character of the motions in such a system.

 129.
binary.

 SPECTROSCOPIC BINARIES.
the Harvard Observatory, announced the discovery of a new class of
and producing no perturbations such as have been considered above, but
source of light which to the eye is indistinguishable from a single
 In Fig.
double star, each moving in its own orbit about their common center of
greater than the distance between the stars themselves.
circumstances no telescope could distinguish between the two stars,
rapid would be their motion in it, and if this orbit were turned
stars were in the relative position there shown, _A_ would be rapidly
move away from it, so that in accordance with the Doppler principle the
directions, thus producing a doubling of the lines, each single line
so far apart.
to the points _A´_, _B´_, their velocities are turned at right angles to
single lines, only to break up again when after another quarter

spectrum thus furnishes half the time of a revolution in the orbit.
distance between the components of a double line shows by means of the
connection with the periodic times fixes the size of the orbit, provided
 This
deviate considerably from this position, it will still present the
something less than the true velocities of the stars in their orbits,
velocity which is directed toward the earth, and it is important to note
they are called, will usually be somewhat larger than those indicated by
will be turned exactly edgewise to us.

spectroscopic binaries.
lines of its spectrum are alternately single and double, their maximum
37 miles per second.
shifted an equal amount from the position occupied by the line when it
component stars whose periodic time in their orbit is 104 days.
this periodic time, together with the velocity of the star's motion, let
 e.
the stars from each other--is approximately 53,000,000 miles, and that
that their orbit plane is turned exactly edgewise toward the earth.

including among them such stars as Polaris, Capella, Algol, Spica, β
, and their number is rapidly increasing,
is determined proving to be a binary or, as in the case of Polaris,
 On account of smaller distance apart their periodic
range from a few days up to several months--more than two years in the
class.

rather greater than that of the sun, but there is as yet no assured case

204.
--Attention has already been drawn (§ 23) to the
 g.
most famous of these _variable stars_, at its maximum of brightness
variable stars show an even greater range.
been named Mira (Latin, _the wonderful_), from its extraordinary range
 For the greater part of the
months in every year it brightens up sufficiently to be seen, rising
second-magnitude star, but more frequently only third or even fourth
brilliancy, falling off to become invisible for a time and then return
preceding maximum.
midsummer, and a month earlier than this for each succeeding year.
it by means of the star map, and by comparing its brightness from night
changes with respect to them.

6 days
regularly variable runs through all its changes of brilliancy, much as

with variable stars, many of them show differences more or less
already been noted in the case of Mira; its maximum brilliancy is
 So, too, the length of the period
with it, and predictions of what such a variable star will do are

205.
--On the other hand, some variable stars
time with a precision like that of clockwork.
regular variables, having a period of 68.
of which time it shines with unchanging luster as a star of the 2.
magnitude, but during the remaining 9 hours of each period it runs down
5 magnitude, and comes back again, as is shown by a curve in
 130.
time of the star's minimum brightness, and the vertical scale shows
 Such a diagram is called the star's light curve, and
 and 32h.
of minimum the star's magnitude is 2.
 after a minimum the
88, etc.
the time of minimum? What is the magnitude 43 days after a minimum?
[Illustration: FIG.
--The light curve of Algol.

 130 are a feature not usually found with light
determination of the motion of Algol in the line of sight.
observations extended over a period of more than two years, but they are
preceded or followed a minimum of the star's light, and each arrow shows
arrows pointing down denoting approach of the star toward the earth, but
kilometers (6.
 The differences of velocity shown by
idea of how consistent among themselves such observations are, but there
earth, and after minimum is approaching it.
observations that in Algol we have to do with a spectroscopic binary,
partially eclipses the bright star and produces thus the variations in
 By combining the spectroscopic observations with the
itself has a diameter somewhat greater than that of the sun, but is of
the dark star is a very little smaller than the sun and has about a
 The distance between the two stars, dark and
 Fig.
relative positions and sizes of these stars as well as the orbits in

The mere fact already noted that close binary systems exist in
proportion of these stars would have their orbit planes turned so nearly
this probability there are already known no less than 15 stars of the
the search for them.

 131.
]
206.
--In addition to these there
are bright and where the variation of brightness follows a very
 Capella would be such a variable if its orbit plane
not variable shows conclusively that such is not the position of the
 Fig.
variable systems of this second type, that of β Lyræ, whose
8 hours, and the student should read from the curve

of the star point to the existence of a binary star of very remarkable
miles, in Fig.
 Note the tide which each of these stars raises in
 The
very low density, which is less than that of air, so that their masses
dimensions and masses perhaps require confirmation, since they depend
 In Fig.
what relative positions must the stars occupy in their orbit in order
brightness? What position will furnish a minimum brightness?
[Illustration: FIG.
--The system of β Lyræ.
]
207.
--It must not be supposed that
 By far the
and a distinction which is pretty well marked in the length of their
 There is a considerable
are many having periods longer than 6 months, but there are very few
and 6 months, so that it is quite customary to divide variable stars
short period less than 6 months, and that this distinction corresponds
fact that the long-period variables are prevailingly red in color, while
yellow.
is not to be inferred that all red stars are variable; a considerable
 The eclipse explanation of
for all of them, while for the long-period variables there is no
unverified hypotheses are plenty.

considerable number of others are "suspected," and it would not be
fluctuate a little in brightness.
a variable star with a period of 11 years.

expected to become more frequent when the sky is systematically explored
in Fig.
 A given region of the sky--e.
, the Northern Crown--is
at each new exposure, so that the stars shall fall at new places upon
 The finally developed plate shows a row of images corresponding to
row will all be of the same size, as are most of those in Fig.
a variable star such as is shown by the arrowhead reveals its presence
shown by smaller and a maximum by larger ones.
at two exposures the star was too faint to print its image upon the

[Illustration: FIG.
--Discovery of a variable star by means of
--PICKERING.

 NEW STARS.
irregular period stand the so-called _new_ or _temporary stars_, which
altogether or sink to comparative insignificance.
thought to be very remarkable and unusual occurrences--"the birth of a
been seen from 1670 to 1848 A.
, for since that time there have been
telescopic.
(Mira, first seen in 1596, was long counted as a new star), they are
bodies moving with considerable velocities along orbits which approach
 The actual collision of two dark bodies moving
star--e.
, meteors--and even the close approach of two cooled-off
and pour out the glowing matter from within so as to produce temporarily

The most famous of all new stars is that which, according to Tycho
best as to be seen with the naked eye in broad daylight.
visible, though with fading light, for about 16 months, and finally
that it can be identified with a ruddy star of the eleventh magnitude in
variability.

some respects the recent ones surpass it in interest, since it has been
find thereby a much more complex set of conditions in the star than

One of the most extraordinary of new stars, and the most brilliant one
February, 1901, and for a short time equaled Capella in brightness.
its light rapidly waned, with periodic fluctuations of brightness like
is lost to the naked eye, although in the telescope it still shines like

By the aid of powerful photographic apparatus, during the period of its
surrounding the star and drifting around and away from it much as if a
sudden outburst of light.
motion, nearly a billion miles per hour, makes such an explanation
ring was merely a reflection of the star's own light from a cloud of
after the fashion of terrestrial meteors, was raised to brilliant
 If we assume this to be the true
from the known velocity with which light travels through space and from
as the new star is called, corresponds to a parallax of about one
direct telescopic measurements of its parallax.

December, 1891, waned, and in the following April vanished, only to

displaced toward opposite ends of the spectrum, and suggesting the
having rapid and opposite motions in the line of sight.
recent investigations cast discredit on this explanation and leave the
with respect both to the motion they indicate and the intrinsic nature
 The varying aspect of the spectra suggested at
present in nebulæ, etc.


CHAPTER XIV
STARS AND NEBULÆ

 STELLAR COLORS.
another in respect of color as well as brightness, and the diligent
of Sirius and Rigel is more nearly a pure white than is that of any
α Orionis and Aldebaran are strongly ruddy, and Antares presents an
 Between these extremes the light of every star
predominant color, shading off, as we have seen, to white at one end of
 There are no green stars, or blue stars,
, where the
quite the usual thing for them to have different colors, and then,
the violet end of the spectrum than does the color of the bright one,
 A fine type of such
yellow and blue, and the yellow star furnishes eight times as much light

The exception which double stars thus make to the general rule of
never been satisfactorily explained, but the rule itself presents no
 Each star is an incandescent body, giving off radiant
and, indeed, far beyond these limits.
unhindered to our eyes every star would appear white, but they are all
layer of the sun--which absorb a portion of their radiant energy and,
from the red end of the spectrum.
star's atmosphere, therefore, the feebler and the ruddier will be its
than the white ones.

 CHEMISTRY OF THE STARS.
instrument to deal with this absorption of light in the stellar
atmosphere to which are due the dark lines of the solar spectrum,
presents a serious obstacle to its use.
the lucid stars and many of the telescopic ones have been studied with
respects the material of which they are made.
elements as hydrogen and iron, carbon, sodium, and calcium are scattered
unwarranted by the present state of knowledge to say that the stars
in a broad way their substance is like rather than unlike that composing
which obtain here.
terrestrial sciences of mathematics and mechanics, but it remained to
are like the physics and chemistry of the earth.

 STELLAR SPECTRA.
compared one with another, it is found that they bear some relation to
and color are both produced by the stellar atmospheres, and it is found

 Sirian stars.
or very faintly tinged with yellow, furnish spectra like that of Sirius,

wave length--i.
, violet and ultraviolet light, and is crossed by a
spectrum of hydrogen.
than is here shown, and we find associated with them still other faint
atmosphere.
even the hydrogen lines themselves are lacking, but the spectrum is

Since with increasing temperature a body emits a continually increasing
spectra in such energy points to a very high temperature in these stars,
 Stars
but next to them in point of numbers stands--
_Type II.
_--To this type of spectrum belong the yellow
 125).
These are not so rich in violet light as are those of Type I, but in
far surpass the Sirian stars.
temperature than the Sirian stars, and a much larger number of chemical
atmospheres.
the sun, together with the fact that most of the sun's stellar neighbors
members of one class, called _solar stars_.

 Red stars.
with that of α Herculis (Fig.
part of the spectrum is almost obliterated, and the remaining yellow and
sharp at one edge, and gradually fading out at the other.
_selective absorption_, extinguishing the blue and leaving the red end
the bands in their spectra "are characteristic of chemical combinations,
.
 proves that at certain elevations in the
combinations can be formed and maintained" (Scheiner-Frost).
chemical compounds here indicated is a hydrocarbon similar to that found
 In the white and yellow stars the temperatures are so high
with another to form compound substances.

 134.
--ESPIN.

but this does not hold true for the eclipse variables like Algol, all of
 The ordinary
temperature and complex structure, which produces the prevailing red
energy of short wave length while allowing the longer, red waves to
 Although their exact nature is not understood, there can be
processes taking place within the star itself, but whether above or

212.
--There is no hard-and-fast dividing line between
insensible gradations, like the transition from youth to manhood and
found numberless peculiarities and varieties of spectra not enumerated
 g.
spectra but bright lines as well, which, like those in Fig.
the presence of incandescent vapors, even in the outer parts of their
 Among the lucid stars about 75 per cent have spectra of the
type, and the remaining 1 per cent are peculiar or of doubtful
 Among the telescopic stars it is probable that much the
prudent to speak with entire confidence upon this point.

admit of a classification so simple as the above, is an impressive fact
from one type of spectrum to the next, leaves little room for doubt that
the same species but in different stages of development, and that the
and in a stage of development which is not at all peculiar, since it is

213.
--In previous chapters we have noted the Pleiades and
add the Hyades, near Aldebaran, and the little constellation Coma
 But more impressive than any of these, although visible only
a telescope of moderate size is shown in Fig.
 136 is a
telescope.
scattered over the sky, and which are made up of stars packed so closely
of the cluster.
full moon's face are crowded in this cluster more than five thousand
nearness to each other is doubtless due to their great distance from us.
It is quite probable that even at the center of this cluster, where more
distances separating adjoining stars are much greater than that
its nearest stellar neighbor.

--Star cluster in Hercules.

photographing star clusters, is that some few of them, which are
stars, mostly very faint and of short period.
northern and one in the southern hemisphere, contain each more than a
a cluster, called Messier 5, not far from the star α Serpentis,
fourteenth magnitude, all having light periods which differ but little
all having a range of brightness from maximum to minimum of about one
 An extraordinary set of coincidences which "points
"
[Illustration: FIG.
--Star cluster in Hercules.
]
[Illustration: FIG.
--The Andromeda nebula as seen in a very small
]
[Illustration: FIG.
--The Andromeda nebula and Holmes's comet.
Photographed by BARNARD.

 139.
]
[Illustration: FIG.
--A photograph of the Andromeda
--ROBERTS.

 NEBULÆ.
 136, we note that its background has a
distinguished, but blend one with another so as to appear like a bright
 The outer part of the cluster is _resolved_ into stars, while in
original photographic plate the individual stars can be distinguished to
 In many cases, however, this is not
call a _nebula_ (Latin, _little cloud_).

great nebula in Andromeda (R.
 0^{h} 37^{m}, Dec.
seen with the naked eye as a faint patch of foggy light.


 Fig.
the same object showing essentially the same shape as in the preceding
 Note the two small nebulæ
which might easily be taken for another nebula but which is in fact a
picture was taken.
 139 is from another drawing of this nebula,
thing; but its characteristic feature, the two dark streaks near the
 140, which is from a

[Illustration: FIG.
--Types of nebulæ.

serve to illustrate the vagueness of its outlines, and how much the
employed and upon the observer's own prepossessions.
among the pictures can not be due to any change in the nebula itself,
them (Fig.

[Illustration: FIG.
--The Trifid nebula.
]
215.
--Some of the fantastic forms which nebulæ present
 141, but in recent
such as these, which are now almost entirely supplanted by photographs
 One of the most
Sagittarius (Fig.
 Note especially the dark lanes that give to this
breaking it into seemingly independent sections.
shown in this cut is about 15 per cent less than that covered by the

[Illustration: FIG.
--A nebula in Cygnus.
]
Fig.
constellation Cygnus, which appears made up of filaments closely
greater than the moon's diameter.

 144.
--KEELER.

Canes Venatici (Fig.
structure, as if the stars composing it were flowing in along curved
 The diameter of the circular part
picture, is about five minutes of arc, a sixth part of the diameter of
breadth, perhaps not much exceeding the width of the spiral streams
 Note how the bright stars that appear within the area
part of them.
followed in many other nebulæ, shows that they are really part and
 Fig.
a great nebula is associated with the star ρ Ophiuchi.

 145.
Ophiuchi.
]
Probably the most impressive of all nebulæ is the great one in Orion
 146), whose position is shown on the star map between Rigel and
 Look for it with an opera glass or even with the
 This is sometimes called an _amorphous_--i.
,
can grasp and little trace of structure or organization.
form and void" at least in its central portions, although on its edges
of the central region.
 146, covers an area
this the companion nebula shown at one side, but photographs made with
in curved lines over the larger part of the constellation Orion.
over a large part of the entire sky the background is faintly covered
separate nebula, would carry the total number of such objects well into

[Illustration: FIG.
--The Orion nebula.

projected against such a nebulous background whose varying intensity
 A part of this nebulous matter is shown
bridge, and leaving little doubt that the nebula is actually a part of

[Illustration: THE PLEIADES (AFTER A PHOTOGRAPH)]
Fig.
with double stars, although the most recent photographic work seems to
brightest parts are shown by the telescope.

while Fig.
student should not fail to note that the Andromeda nebula (Fig.
shows distinct traces of a spiral structure, only here we do not see its
its presumably circular outline is foreshortened into a narrow ellipse.

 147.
 HERSCHEL.

round disks like those of Uranus or Neptune, and this appearance has
 The comet in Fig.
smaller, would represent fairly well the nebulæ of this type.
a planetary nebula has a star at its center, and sometimes it appears
 The most

216.
--A star cluster, like the one in Hercules,
spectrum is a continuous one, testifying to the presence of stars,
 But in a
discontinuous one containing only a few bright lines, showing that here
considerable pressure.
kind and make up about half of all the known gaseous nebulæ.
worthy of note that a century ago Sir William Herschel had observed a
that they were "not of a starry nature," a conclusion which has been
 The green shimmer is, in fact,
present and is always the brightest part of the spectrum of gaseous

In faint nebulæ this line constitutes the whole of their visible
usually associated with it, and a very bright nebula, like that in
part they can not be identified in the spectrum of any terrestrial
 An exception to this is found in the hydrogen lines, which
indications of one or two other known substances.

 DENSITY OF NEBULÆ.
diminishing the pressure to which an incandescent gas is subject,
surmise from the very simple character and few lines of these nebular
 But
attenuated, for we must not assume that this shining gas is all that
may be associated with it any amount of dark matter which can not be
 It is easy to think in this
these seem to be scattered broadcast on every side of the solar system

But, whatever may be associated in the nebula with the glowing gas which
be very small, or rather its average density must be very small, for the
average density of its matter were equal to that of air the resulting
the sun through space.
the earth subtend an angle of about half a degree, and while we know
is away the greater must be its real dimensions, and that this increase
diminishing intensity of gravity at great distances, so that for a given
 g.
attracts the sun depends upon its density but not at all upon its
 Now, the nebula must attract the sun in some degree, and must
so that year after year we should see the nebula from slightly different
in the apparent direction of the nebula from us--i.
, a proper motion,
the density of the attracting matter.
show that its proper motion is wholly inappreciable, certainly far less
proper motion the mean density of the nebula must be some millions of
level--i.
, the average density throughout the nebula is comparable
meteors first become visible.

 MOTION OF NEBULÆ.
is a characteristic feature of all nebulæ.
known case of sensible proper motion of one of these bodies, although a
amount from +30 to -40 miles per second, the plus sign indicating an
 While a part of these velocities may be only
least is real motion of the nebulæ themselves.
through the celestial spaces in much the same way and with the same
line of sight (angular motions) are an index of their great distance
 No one has ever succeeded in measuring the parallax of a nebula

[Illustration: FIG.
--A part of the Milky Way.

the fact that their several parts and the stars which are involved
change of position during the past century, is further evidence of
 In a few cases, however, there
what was formerly a faint part has become a brighter one, or _vice

[Illustration: FIG.
--The Milky Way near θ Ophiuchi.
]
219.
--Closely related to nebulæ and star clusters is
appearance to the unaided eye the student should become familiar by
 Figs.
of two small parts of it, and serve to bring out the small stars of
 Every star shown in these pictures is invisible to
 The general
these contain no indication of the wealth of detail which even the naked
 Bright and faint parts, dark rifts which cut it
shot away--such are some of the features to be found by attentive

[Illustration: FIG.
--The Milky Way near β Cygni.
]
Speaking generally, the course of the Milky Way is a great circle
constellation Coma Berenices.
different in different parts of the heavens, amounting where it is
boundaries are too vague and ill defined to permit much accuracy of
 Observe the very bright part between β and γ Cygni, nearly
the nebulous light into a great number of stars, which are here rather
 But the resolution into
unresolved shimmer.
 150 is a photograph of a small part of this
star, the galaxy is not completely resolved.
rich in stars, the nearly empty space between the branches of the galaxy
 Another hole in the Milky Way may be found a
and poverty here noted there may be found every gradation of nebulous

The Milky Way is not so simple in its structure as might at first be
details.
shape and extent, the arrangement of its parts, and their relation to
astronomers and others who have sought to trace out in this way what is

220.
--How far out into space do the stars
mutually related parts, or are they bunched promiscuously, each for
called "the most important problem of stellar astronomy, the acquisition
" While many
astronomers and which are still current in the books are certainly
true, the theme itself is of such grandeur and permanent interest as to
 But before proceeding to its
these, however inadequate, are in the main simple and not far to seek.

pertinent to the problem of stellar distribution, are of small avail,
classes of stars, usually the very bright ones or those nearest to the
 Almost the sole available data are contained in the brightness of
 The most
evenly sprinkled upon it.
few in others, and the laborious star gauges, actual counting of the
Herschels, Celoria, and others, suffice to show that this lack of
stars.

next, as shown in § 187, is proof of another kind of irregularity in
 It is not difficult to show, mathematically, that if
and as bright as they are in the regions nearer to the sun, then the
those of the next brighter magnitude--e.
, four times as many
 But, as we have
many, and from the discrepancy between these numbers, an actual
the whole the stars near the sun are either bigger or brighter or more

221.
--But the arrangement of the stars is not
and among these the Milky Way is the dominant feature.
photographic plate alike show that it is made up of stars which,
average some twenty times as numerous in the galaxy as at its poles,
and then more slowly.
much more pronounced among the very faint telescopic stars than among
the tenth or eleventh magnitude, while very plainly showing the
galaxy as in the constellations most remote from it.
showing the condensation of the brightest stars that one half of all the
included within a belt extending 12° on either side of the center line

In addition to this general condensation of stars toward the Milky Way,
which are worth attention.
ever, found far from the Milky Way, and stars with bright lines in their
 Stars with spectra of
the Milky Way than are stars of the solar type, and in consequence of

elsewhere, that its course across the sky would be plainly indicated by

On the other hand, nebulæ as a class show a distinct aversion for the
from it, much as if they represented raw material which was lacking
are there so numerous.

 RELATION OF THE SUN TO THE MILKY WAY.
a _great circle_ of the sky, but only of moderate width, shows that it
which the solar system lies, a member of the galactic system, and
 This position, however, is not to
nearly in the plane of the Milky Way, is ceaselessly altering its
outside its limits.

rings, like the coils of the great spiral nebula in Andromeda, and
itself.
 149 and 150 how the background is made up of
appearance of a thin sheet of cloud through which we look to barren
 While, mathematically, this appearance can not be
than a sheet of starry matter stretching continuously from the nearer
nevertheless, most students of the question hold it to be such a ring of
comparatively vacant, although even here are some hundreds of thousands
and to crowd together a little more densely than elsewhere in the region

223.
--The dimensions of this stellar system
the plane of the Milky Way than at right angles to that plane, for stars
testify by their feeble light to their great distance from the earth,
than the twelfth magnitude.
aperture, could count in the Milky Way more than a dozen times as many
aperture; but around the poles of the galaxy the two telescopes showed
smaller telescope reached to the limits of the stellar system.
recently, indeed, the telescope with which Fig.
seems to have reached the farthest limit of the Milky Way, for on a
completely resolved into stars which stand out upon a black background

224.
--Each additional step into the depths of
beyond the Milky Way is largely a matter of conjecture.
thinking it an infinite void, endless emptiness, and our intellectual
stellar systems, of which ours, bounded by the galaxy, is only one.
There is, indeed, little direct evidence that other such systems exist,
central cloud of stars, and in the southern hemisphere, invisible in our
appearance, but cut off from all apparent connection with it, much as we

These two bodies are known as the Magellanic clouds, and individually
 According to Sir John
tracts and ill-defined patches of irresolvable nebula, and of nebulosity
Milky Way, as also of regular and irregular nebulæ .
.
clusters in every stage of resolvability, and of clustering groups
clusters of stars.
surely include an area of more than 40 square degrees--i.
, as much as
several hundred nebulæ and clusters "which far exceeds anything that is
" Although its
delineation, it has yielded to the modern photographic processes, which
subordinate stars, nebulæ, and clusters, as is the Milky Way.

a smaller distance, although for the present all efforts at determining
 But the spiral form which is
spiral nebula near whose center lies the sun, a humble member of a great
the poles of the galaxy and completely encircled by its coils.
plausible such a view may appear, it is for the present, at least, pure
argument upon the appearance of the galaxy itself.

 ABSORPTION OF STARLIGHT.
that at least within the confines of the solar system meteoric matter,
the same is true, although in smaller degree, in even the remoter parts
 In this case the light which comes from the farther stars over
absorbed and enfeebled by the obstacles which it encounters on the way.
Unless celestial space is transparent to an improbable degree the
limit beyond which no star is able to send its light, and beyond which
 A lighthouse throws into the fog its
though the celestial lights shine farther, a limit to their reach is

the universe may well be limitless and the number of stellar systems
conceal from us and to shut off from our investigation all save a minor





226.
--To use a common figure of speech, the
 We have found it filled with an activity that
their orbits, but which extends to their minutest parts, the molecules
and stars.
bodies in their orbits, seem fitted to be of endless duration; while
sooner or later must come to an end and be replaced by something
 The study of things as they are thus leads inevitably to
 A sound science should
as of to-day, and we need not shrink from such questions, although

The historian of America finds little difficulty with events of the
information about America in the fifteenth century are much less
American mankind in the first century of the Christian era is wholly
 So, as we attempt to look into the past or the future of the
remoter periods until even the vaguest outlines of its development are
 Our
to cover the whole duration of things, but must be limited in its scope
and even for these we need to bear constantly in mind the logical bases

227.
--The first of these bases is: An
 Our only hope of reading the
a complete knowledge of it, but one which is sound so far as it goes.
Our position is like that of a detective who is called upon to unravel a
left behind in its commission.
broken glass must be examined and compared, and fashioned into a theory
is sure to vitiate the theories based upon them, so a false science of
has been; while a correct but incomplete knowledge of the present does
position of the detective who correctly understands what he sees but

The second basis of our inquiry is: The assumed permanence of natural
 The law of gravitation certainly held true a century ago as well
law of the universe for untold millions of years; but that it has
one for our purpose.
mechanics and physics and chemistry to which we must appeal; if there
place lie beyond the scope of our inquiry, and are in the domain
 It is for this reason that science
universe, but considers only its orderly development within limited
 What kind of a past universe would, under the operation
we have to deal, and of it we may say with Helmholtz: "From the
concerning the limitations of its methods and the scope of its known
"
To ferret out the processes by which the heavenly bodies have been
development now in progress which tend to change the existing order of
effects into both past and future.
process, however slow, may produce great results if it works always and
trend is never reversed, that we find a partial clew to both past and

228.
--The first of these to claim our attention
X, is the means by which the solar output of radiant energy is
 Its amount, only a few feet per annum, is
working century after century in the same direction, and, given time
past, enormous transformations in the sun's bulk and equally significant

Thus, as we attempt to trace the sun's history into the past, the
the greater the space (volume) through which its molecules are spread.
By reason of this expansion its density must have been less then than
density was comparable with what we find in the nebulæ of to-day.
ideas of the sun's present mechanism are sound, then, as a necessary
condensation in which its component particles were year by year packed
 As we have seen
was radiated away as fast as produced, while the remainder was stored
now.
shrinkage, and so powerfully opposes the gravitative forces as to
of further condensation.

contraction of its bulk must have been more rapid, and attempts have
determine how long a time has been consumed in the development of the
space of greater diameter than Neptune's orbit.
precision is not to be expected in results of this kind, but, from a
the shrinkage of a mass equal to that of the sun, it seems that the
possibly hundreds of millions of years, but almost certainly does not

229.
--The future duration of the sun as a source of
these.
half spent, for the shrinkage results in an ever-increasing density,
behavior of a liquid or solid, and we recall that these forms of matter
radiation caused them to contract.
their temperature must fall, and when the sun's substance becomes too
as a consequence of the radiation into surrounding space, and must
speedily become dark and opaque, cutting off the light of the central
of the still incandescent mass beneath.
short duration only, and its final condition must be that of a dark
energy.
that the output of light and heat may be seriously diminished by the
with Jupiter and Saturn.
incandescent, and at the present time are in a state of development

furnish light and heat at its present rate is not likely to exceed

This idea of the sun as a developing body whose present state is only
physics.
latitude, and the peculiar law of rotation of the sun in different
operating beneath its photosphere, but of something which happened to it
 g.
collision with some other body.
after the storm which produced them has disappeared, and, according to
sun's mass might well require tens of thousands, or even hundreds of
visible, like the waves, as phenomena for which the actual condition of

230.
--The theory of the sun's progressive
comparatively modern, but more than a century ago philosophic students
the earlier stages of its career the sun must have been an enormously
remotest planet.
a dominant influence during the nineteenth century, has left, in a
of planetary motion, which suggest and lead up to the nebular theory of
substantially his line of thought, but with some freedom of translation

He says: "To trace out the primitive source of the planetary movements,
in the same direction and nearly in the same plane.
the satellites are in the same direction as those of the planets.
The rotations of the planets and the sun are in the same direction as
 (4) Planets and
 (5) The orbits of comets
inclinations to the ecliptic.
the result of chance seemed to Laplace incredible, and, seeking a cause
produced or controlled the motions of the planets, it must have reached
separate them, the cause can have been nothing else than a fluid of
 A
.
 the
planets and has shrunk by degrees to its present dimensions.
not very different from the idea developed in § 228 from a consideration
generating the sun's heat by contraction of its bulk was unknown, and he
nebulous sun, while we now know that this is unnecessary.
primitive nebula was hot or cold the shrinkage would take place in much
temperature, but its development would be slower if it were hot in the

But again Laplace: "How did the sun's atmosphere determine the rotations
deeply immersed in this atmosphere its resistance to their motion would
the planets were formed, one by one, at the outer limits of the solar
the plane of the sun's equator.
to dynamical principles that something of this kind must happen, and
perhaps comparable to the rings of Saturn or the asteroid zone, would
cast off rings to produce satellites.

]
Planets and satellites would then all have similar motions, as noted at
inheritance from a common source, the rotation of the primitive
 "All the bodies which circle around a planet
abandoned as rotation became more and more rapid, this rotation should
any of the bodies which have been cast off, and this holds true for the
"
231.
--In Laplace's time this
as compared with the rotation of Saturn itself, but, as we have seen in
particles which move at different rates of speed, and comparing, through
known periodic time of the satellites, we may find that these particles
axis.
about one third of a Martian day, and we find in cases like this grounds
 Compare also Laplace's argument
(Chapter XI).

raised, the nebular theory agrees with the facts of Nature at so many
its major outlines as being at least an approximation to the course of
points--e.
, the formation of planets and satellites through the
to call for revision and possibly serious modification of the theory.

substituting for the primitive _gaseous_ nebula imagined by Laplace, a
development would become transformed into the gaseous state by rising
 From this point of view much of the meteoric dust still
over in fashioning the sun and planets.
recently given much attention to this subject, in dissenting from some
have been one in which the matter of the system was "so brought together
outer part, and high mass, low momentum, and sphericity to the central
with the outer parts of a large one.

 BODE'S LAW.
noting the light it casts upon one point otherwise obscure--the meaning
 This law, stated in mathematical form, makes a
distances of the satellites of Jupiter and Saturn from these planets.
Now, Roche has shown by the application of physical laws to the
by means of a certain mathematical formula very similar to Bode's law,
beginning of the shrinking process.
one corresponding to Bode's law he reaches the conclusion that the
were formed at successive _equal_ intervals of time--i.
, that Mars is
 The
interval of time between the formation of Neptune and Uranus was shorter
 But too much
 So long as the manner
conclusions about their time of birth must remain of doubtful validity.

 TIDAL FRICTION BETWEEN EARTH AND MOON.
theories of development within the solar system has been worked out by
 G.
 Darwin, who, starting with certain very simple assumptions
these, by a strict process of mathematical reasoning, far-reaching
 The key to these
of the tides (§ 42) there is now in progress and has been in progress
from the earth to the moon.
slowly destroyed by the friction of the tides, as the motion of a
this slowing down, the moon is pushed farther and farther away from the
of years ago.

 24 has been used to illustrate the action of the moon in raising
(§ 36) this action must be accompanied by an equal and contrary reaction
 The moon moves
in the same direction, as shown by the curved arrow in the figure.
tidal wave, _I_, therefore points a little _in advance_ of the moon's
ahead in its orbital motion a little faster than it would move if the
by the broken circle in the figure.
_I´´_ pulls back and tends to neutralize the effect of the wave at _I_,
influence, and the moon on the whole moves a very little faster, and by
from the earth than it would if there were no tides.

 CONSEQUENCES OF TIDAL FRICTION UPON THE EARTH.
moving the moon away from the earth is a cumulative one, going on
described not as a circle or ellipse, or any other curve which returns
of whose coils is a little larger than the preceding one, although this
small and the tidal influence feeble when compared with the whole
 But, given time enough, even this
years of past opportunity would have sufficed for the tidal forces to
position.

distance between them must go on increasing, although at an ever slower
and the slower the working out of their results.
the moon was nearer the earth than now, tidal influences must have been
time, particularly if, as seems probable, at some past epoch the earth
 Then, instead of tides in
earth would respond to the moon's attraction in _bodily tides_ of
their molecules one upon another, and correspondingly greater effect in

But, whether the tide be a bodily one or confined to the waters of the
amount of friction which will affect the earth much as a brake affects a
day as well as a longer month on account of the moon's increased
 Slowing down the earth's rotation is the direct action of the
 Pushing the moon away is the form in which the

235.
--When the moon was
than the lunar tides upon the earth, and, as we have seen in Chapter IX,
rotation and brought our satellite to the condition in which it presents

These two processes, slowing down the rotation and pushing away the
worth noting in this connection that when for any reason the tide ceases
the moon (§ 99), its work is ended, for when there is no motion of the
the one body, and no reaction to that friction to push away the other.
But this permanent and stationary tidal wave in the moon, or elsewhere,
planet, moving once about its orbit in the time required for one
tends to produce here the result long since achieved in our satellite,
always the same side toward the moon.
small compared with that of the earth, and has a vastly greater momentum

hundred thousand miles, and the day lengthened out by tidal influence to
of equal length, and the moon thereby permanently hidden from one

236.
--Retracing into the past the course of
of the mathematical theory of tidal friction to a time at which these
found possible to trace out the mode of their separation from one body
 In the earliest part of
bodies at some considerable distance from each other, with the earth
to the ecliptic than is now the case.
the lunar tides, according to Darwin, have been instrumental in tipping
determining the eccentricity of the moon's orbit and its position with

337.
--The satellites of the outer
appears to be independent evidence that some of them, at least, turn
the work of tidal friction has here been accomplished.
XI that it is at present an open question whether the inner planets,
their day and year being of equal length.
observational evidence upon this point, Schiaparelli has sought to show
for Mercury, since the tidal forces which tend to bring about this
certainly produced it in the case of the moon and Saturn's satellite,
 The same line of reasoning would show that every satellite in
Saturn, must, as a consequence of tidal friction, turn always the same

238.
--The sun also raises tides in the earth, and their
checking the rotation of the earth and thrusting earth and sun apart,
the moon.
possibly until the day and year are made of equal length--i.
, they
earth and moon apart.
will be produced.
will again raise a tide in the earth which will run around it _from west
accelerate the earth's rotation, and by its reaction to bring the moon

We may note that an effect of this kind must be in progress now between
is only one third of a Martian day.
satellite is in the last stages of its existence as an independent body,

239.
--In looking forward to such a catastrophe, however,
character.
since before it reaches us it will have been torn asunder by the excess
which it exerts upon the far side.
analysis we are able to assign a limiting distance between any planet
same face toward the planet, can not come without being broken into
 If we represent the radius of the planet by _r_, and the
of the satellite by _q_, then
    Roche's limit = 2.

Thus in the case of earth and moon we find from the densities given in
65, and with _r_ = 3,963 miles we obtain 11,400 miles as
being broken up by the difference of the earth's attractions for its

We must observe, however, that Roche's limit takes no account of
which a stick or stone resists fracture, but is concerned only with the
moon's center and toward the earth.
size these gravitative forces are insignificant, and cohesion is the
moon, the case is just reversed, cohesion plays a small part and
 We may conclude,
breaking up the moon, or any other large body, into fragments of a size
in preserving them from further disintegration.

 SATURN'S RINGS.
connection.
Roche's limit for this planet, and we have already seen that the rings
 Whatever may
existence, we have in Roche's limit the explanation why the material of
would tear into pieces any considerable satellite thus formed and

Saturn's rings present the only case within the solar system where
Roche's limit, and it is an interesting question whether these rings can
temporary feature.
among themselves in representing the rings as larger than they now
mutual disturbances--collisions--their momentum is being slowly wasted
 But the
is too scanty to justify positive conclusions in the matter.
other hand, Nolan suggests that in the outer parts of the ring small
suffice to push them away from the ring beyond Roche's limit, and that
the expense of the ring.

planet, and, as we have seen above, must be approaching still nearer to

241.
--The fine series of photographs of the moon
astronomers of that observatory for a minute study of the lunar
determine something about the manner in which it was formed.
conclusions are, in general, that at some past time the moon was a hot
whose further shrinkage compressed the liquid nucleus and led to a long
latest and feeblest stages produced the lunar craters, while traces of
although nearly obliterated, are still preserved in certain large but
seas, etc.
consider convincing evidence of the existence in past times of a lunar
 But this seems doubtful, since the force of gravity at the
earth, even though placed upon the moon, could not permanently endure,
surrounding space.

a state of ceaseless agitation, each one darting to and fro, colliding
traveling with velocities which, on the average, amount to a good many
molecule they may be much less or much greater than the average value,
as the average.
these swiftly moving particles of oxygen or nitrogen were headed away
attractive power of the earth would be insufficient to check its motion,
the earth and return no more.
per second is more than thirty times as great as the average velocity of
move so swiftly, and the loss of the earth's atmosphere by leakage of
 But upon the moon, or any other body where
our satellite a velocity of little more than one mile per second would
atmosphere.
frequently attained, particularly in former times when the moon's
would be considerably increased, and the amount of leakage might become,
moon's atmosphere and leading finally to its present state of
 It is possible that the moon may at one time have had an
and the same line of reasoning may be applied to the asteroids and to
degree, to the smaller planets, Mercury and Mars.

 STELLAR DEVELOPMENT.
the line of development followed by one star, the sun, and treating this
star, in so far as it lies within our reach, begins with a condition in
temperature.
gravitative forces, the star's temperature rises to a maximum, and then
to the list of dark stars whose existence can only be detected in
 The most
all the celestial bodies--sun, moon and planets, stars, nebulæ, and
of development, and who has sought by means of their spectra to classify
 While the
seriously controverted, the detailed application of its principles is
that in the present state of knowledge stellar spectra furnish a key to
general statements.

 151.
according to SECCHI.

 STELLAR SPECTRA.

an average star.
temperature is near the maximum; Type II belongs to a later stage in
immediately preceding extinction.

to permit a single star to be followed through all the stages of its
examining many stars, each at a different stage of progress, and,
spectra shown in Fig.
more detail the process of stellar growth and decay; but for the most
astronomers with much reserve.

Type III, for this is what we should expect to find if the development
small fraction of its total life.
number of stars with spectra of the first type would point to a long
 The period in which the sun belongs,
others.
have spectra of the third type, we conclude that variability, with its
sign of old age and approaching extinction.
variables, on the other hand, having spectra of the first type, are
shortness of their light periods in some measure confirms this

We have noted in § 196 that the sun's near neighbors are prevailingly
composed of first-type stars, and from this we may now conclude that in
rule, somewhat further developed than is the case elsewhere.

 DOUBLE STARS.
development growing out of the effects of tidal friction, which must
to increase the distance between the components of such a star.
in such a system as is shown in Fig.
component of the double star shrink to smaller dimensions, and this
which in turn must push the components apart, so that in view of the
fairly regard a star like β Lyræ as in the early stages of its
light, since the eclipses which now take place must cease with
exactly edgewise toward the earth.
shortness of periodic time in a double star seem, therefore, to be
characteristic of both Algol variables and spectroscopic binaries as a
stages of their career.
larger the orbit, and the greater the periodic time in the orbit, the

In his theory of tidal friction, Darwin has pointed out that whenever
required for rotation about the axis, the effect of the tides is to
See has urged that with increasing distance between the components of a
more and more eccentric, so that we have in the shape of such orbits a
farther advanced are the stars.
connection that among the double stars whose orbits have been computed
its eccentricity--a relation which must hold true if tidal friction
confirms in some degree the criteria of stellar age which are furnished

245.
--The nebular hypothesis of Laplace has inclined astronomers
stars, but which is now in a very crude and undeveloped stage.
great bulk and small density seem also to indicate that gravitation has
sun and stars.
different stages of development.
void like that of Orion; the spiral, ring, and planetary nebulæ and the
goal.
stages in one line of development; for example, the primitive nebula
and _vice versa_.
cluster will ever break up into isolated stars such as those whose
 122.

 CLASSIFICATION.
their stage of development, and arranging them in due order, we should
of chaotic appearance such as that represented in Fig.
 Above these
although the exact sequence in which they should be arranged remains a
 Still higher up in the scale are star clusters whose
means of their spectra, as shown in Fig.
development of each star is probably from Type I, through II, into III
its radiant energy.
have recently entered this dark stage.
than these, but it is not so far along as are Mars and Mercury; while
accessible to our research, having reached a state of decrepitude which
others are moving.

chips, too small to achieve by themselves much progress along the normal
some larger body, to share thenceforth in its fortunes.

 STABILITY OF THE UNIVERSE.
in the mathematical astronomy of a century ago when Laplace showed that
perturbations in the motions and positions of these bodies, but could
orbits.
neglected, either of which is fatal to its validity.
friction--as we have already seen, tends to wreck the systems of
other influence which tends to impede their orbital motion.
inertia of the planet in its forward movement that balances the sun's
attraction the upper hand and must ultimately precipitate the planet
 The meteoric matter with which the earth comes ceaselessly
very small, and something of the same kind may come from the medium

It seems incredible that the luminiferous ether, which is supposed to
of stars and planets rushing through it with velocities which in many
 If there is a resistance to this
words of Thomson and Tait, who say in their great Treatise on Natural
estimating the relative importance of tidal friction and of the
move; but, whatever it may be, there can be but one ultimate result for
under existing laws and not disturbed by meeting with other moving
 That result is the falling together of all into one
relatively to the surrounding medium.

the mouth of Prospero the lines:
    "The cloud-capp'd towers, the gorgeous palaces,
    Yea, all which it inherit, shall dissolve;
    Leave not a rack behind.

 THE FUTURE.
scope of scientific research to affirm that the visible order of things
sketched above, may be profoundly modified in ages to come, by
 We have already noted that the
insecure are its conclusions, and the remoter consequences of present
 But the one great
 The
abide until its final dissolution, has passed away from scientific
 A universe
forth by Goethe in the lines:
    "Thus work I at the roaring loom of Time,
"

We may define a food to be any substance which will repair the functional
and nervous energy.
is a food; as although it is admitted by the lungs, it passes into the
stomach.
as enters the body by the intestinal canal.
being distinct from food, but for this there is no sufficient reason.

and bone-formers.
classification will not bear criticism.
heat-givers.

These last are not strictly foods, if we keep to the definition already
in the other two classes, and cannot well be excluded from consideration.

 It is the

Mineral Matter or Salts, is left as an ash when food is thoroughly
 The most important salts are calcium phosphate, carbonate and
of magnesium, iron and silicon.

therefore present in all food, except in the case of some highly-prepared
 Children require a good proportion of
less.
constituents, white flour and rice are deficient.
are especially recommended for the quantity of phosphates and other salts
 Mineral matter is necessary not only for the bones but

When haricots are cooked, the liquid is often thrown away, and the beans
 Not only is the food
 The author has made
lentils and medium haricot beans were soaked all night (16 hours) in just
 The water was poured off and
weighed.
water until thoroughly cooked, the liquid being kept as low as possible.
The liquid was poured off as clear as possible, from the haricots,
 The ash was taken in each case, and the alkalinity
 The quantity
much more than the original weight of the pulse; not quite as much could
The loss on soaking in cold water, unless the water is preserved, is seen
 The split lentils, having had the protecting skin
 In every case the ash contained a good deal of
 Potatoes are rich in important potash salts; by
skins, scarcely any.

The usual addition of common salt (sodium-chloride) to boiled potatoes is

salts that the addition of common salt is unnecessary.
latter excites thirst and spoils the natural flavour of the food.
the custom, especially in restaurants, to add a large quantity of salt to
 Bakers' brown bread is usually
 In some persons much salt causes
vegetarian restaurants causing or increasing dandruff.
for salt is an acquired taste, and after its discontinuance for a time,

Organic Compounds are formed by living organisms (a few can also be
 They are entirely decomposed by combustion.

compounds or heat-producers, but these terms are also descriptive of the
 These contain carbon, hydrogen and oxygen only, and
muscular and nervous energy.
water and carbon dioxide (carbonic acid gas).

glycogen, &c.
capable of digestion.
to form water, the carbon alone being available to produce heat by
 Starch is the most widely distributed food.
water, but when cooked is readily digested and absorbed by the body.
Starch is readily converted into sugar, whether in plants or animals,
 There are many kinds of sugar, such as grape, cane and

The Oils and Fats consist of the same elements as the carbohydrates,
and this surplus is available for the production of energy.
combustion in the body they produce nearly two-and-a-quarter times (4 :
9 = 2.
small quantities, they are not easily digested, a portion passing away by
 The fat in the body is not solely dependent upon the
containing none.
health.
 In the Arctic regions the
 Nuts are generally rich in oil.
Oatmeal contains more than any of the other cereals (27 analyses gave from
3 per cent.

 What is called Peach-kernel
obtained from plum and apricot stones, is almost as tasteless and useful,
 It is a very agreeable and useful food.
It is often added to, as an adulterant, or substituted for the true Almond
 The best qualities of Olive oil are much esteemed, though they are
 The
 Any that has
window should be rejected, as the flavour is affected.
in a cool place.
rancidity, but is frequently adulterated.
mention.
pleasant flavour, resembling that of kidney beans.
oil has an agreeable taste, and is considered equal to Olive oil for
 The best qualities are rather difficult to obtain; those

 Salad oil, not sold
perhaps a little Olive oil to impart a richer flavour.

cocoanut oil, and they are excellent for cooking purposes.
that biscuits, &c.
without showing any trace of rancidity, than if butter or lard had been
 They are also to be had agreeably flavoured by admixture with
, "cream.

and better than most butter as sold.
a little solid vegetable fat spread on it.
little Peach-kernel oil upon some ground walnut kernels (or other ground
consistency and spread upon the bread.
be used in pastry in the place of butter or lard.

always understood.

oils are quite different and consist of carbon and hydrogen alone.
these, petroleum is incapable of digestion, whilst others are poisonous.

combustion into the same compounds as the carbohydrates.
appetite, stimulate digestion, and finally form carbonates in combination
 The chief
; citric
raspberry, &c.

Some place these under Class III.
 Oxalic acid (except
are poisonous.

 They are
sulphur, and are extremely complex bodies.
flesh in the body; but without previously forming it, they may be
 They form the essential

Proteids are excreted from the body as water, carbon dioxide, urea, uric

The principal proteids of animal origin have their corresponding proteids
 Some kinds, whether of animal or vegetable
 They have the same

The Osseids comprise ossein, gelatin, cartilage, &c.
and connective issue.
unlike them they cannot form flesh or fulfil the same purpose in
 Some food chemists wish to call the osseids, albuminoids; what

Jellies are of little use as food; not only is this because of the low
which is mixed with a large proportion of water.

and to a slight extent salts, form the only food that animals can derive
 When man consumes animal food--a
sheep obtained from grass, clover, turnips, &c.
flesh once existed as proteids in the vegetables; some in exactly the same

Flesh contains no starch or sugar, but a small quantity of glycogen.
fat in an animal is derived from the carbohydrates, the fats and the
 The soil that produced the herbage,
capable of direct utilisation by man.
through animals there is an enormous economic loss, as the greater part of
as flesh when the animal is delivered into the hands of the butcher.
imagine that flesh food is more easily converted into flesh and blood in
vegetables, but such is not the case.
vegetables is digested in the same manner.
those of vegetables, are converted into peptone by the digestive
could not be absorbed and utilised by the body.
digestion of both animal and vegetable proteids and fats are the same.
Formerly, proteid matter was looked upon as the most valuable part of the
 It was
substance, but to be utilised in proportion to muscular exertion.
views are now known to be wrong.
matter, such as is easily obtained from vegetable food, is ample for the
 Increased muscular exertion requires but a
 It is the carbohydrates, or
are the main source of muscular energy.
the most prolonged and powerful exertion, thrive on vegetables of
have subsisted on what most Englishmen would consider a meagre vegetarian

A comparison of flesh and vegetable food, shows in flesh an excessive
equivalent of starch and sugar) and a variable quantity of fat.
food differs much, but as a rule it contains a much smaller quantity of
quantity of fat.
fat.

and fats entail little strain on the system; their ultimate products are
 The changes which
 There is ample
rejection, when taken in moderate quantity, as is the case in a dietary of
 The proteids in the human body, after fulfilling their
the principal part, including all the nitrogen, is expelled by the kidneys
uric acid in the form of quadurates.

their natural food.
, which are consumed by the

nutritious matter liberated and digested.
slightly acted upon by the digestive juices.
capacious stomachs and the intestines are very long.
simpler digestive organs and short intestines.
substances which leave much indigestible residue, such as skin, ligaments
much of such things as possible.
the order _Primates_) have a digestive canal intermediate in complexity
 A certain quantity of
bowels.
the frugivora more, and the herbivora a much larger quantity.
consumption by man of what is commonly called concentrated food is the
 Most
contain aloes or other drugs which stimulate the action of the intestines.

non-nutritious matter has been removed is often advocated, generally by
 Such food would be advantageous only if it
are omitting from consideration certain diseased conditions, when such
 The eminent physiologist and bacteriologist, Elie
organs is not only useless but often productive of derangement and
 In several cases where it has been necessary, in consequence of
intestines, the digestive functions have been perfectly performed.
not that our organs are at fault, but our habits of life differ from that
 In past times, when a simple dietary in which flesh
wholly or nearly all derived from vegetable sources and simply prepared is
 The Englishman going
from disease of the liver and other organs, to which the natives and the
strangers.

 As a reason
that such is less perfectly digested than animal food and that it
 It is also urged that
 We have
smaller amount of food.
cellulose in his food to stimulate intestinal action and prevent

It is difficult to determine how much of a food is unassimilated in the
 This is for the reason of the intestinal refuse consisting not only
and epithelial debris.
one-third to one-half of the whole of the fæces, which is much more than

John Goodfellow has shown that of very coarse wholemeal bread quite 14 per
 was undigested, whilst bread made from ordinary grade wholemeal
5 per cent.
believed would exclude other than the food waste.
made on a person who was eating nothing but the bread.
that a smaller proportion would have remained unassimilated had the bread
 It is advisable that wheatmeal he ground as
but apt to irritate the bowels.
only 4.
 and a coarse white bread 4.
 of waste, a fine
a greater weight of flour richer in proteid and mineral matter.
large number of experiments with man, it has been calculated that of
, from
, from vegetables and fruits 80 per cent.
The difference between the proportions digested of the other food
 Although there is here a theoretical advantage
importance than a little undigestible waste.
health.
diet, of whom we have given some particulars elsewhere, Professor Jaffa
 During the ten days trial the percentages
5, fat 86.
fibre 80, ash 5.
7.
"generally speaking, the food was quite thoroughly assimilated, the
ordinary mixed diet.
 of the
 The results of a number of foreign
4
, the former value being from mixed wheat and rye, and the latter
"

--The refuse includes seeds, skin, &c.
is wasted in cutting them away; the analysis was made on the rest.

--Flesh is easier to digest raw.
doctors, eat minced raw flesh, raw beef juice and even fresh warm blood.
Such practice is abhorrent to every person of refinement.
the offensive appearance and qualities of flesh and changes the flavour;
 Raw
both man and animals.
nearer in composition and quality to our own flesh and tissues, it is
hardening the muscle substance and scorching it by cooking.

the flavour.
the best.
hot, thus favouring indigestion and decay of the teeth.
pulses can only with difficulty be eaten raw.
starch granules swell and break up, the plant cells are ruptured, the

 Cooking increases our range and variety
 The civilised races use it to excess and over-season their

If baking powders are used they should only be of the best makes.
should be composed of sodium bicarbonate and tartaric acid, in such
and carbon dioxide (carbonic acid) should result.
excess of sodium bicarbonate.
 They
phosphate, calcium superphosphate and calcium sulphate.
powders often consist of the same ingredients, and sometimes also of
 These are often made and sold by ignorant men, whose
 Calcium superphosphate and acid calcium
qualities are often used there is danger in this direction.
for baking powder is, tartaric acid 8 ozs.
,
 The last is added to baking powders to improve
 The ingredients must be first
it decomposes, and then thoroughly mixed; this must be preserved in well
 Another formula, which is slow rising and well
, cream of tartar 9 ozs.
rice flour about 14 ozs.
flavouring.
colouring.
saffron; turmeric would do if it were not that it gives a slightly
 Artificial colouring matters or coal tar derivatives are

Drinks.
interfered with; a drink is better taken at the end of a meal.
practice of washing down food with hot tea is bad.
of a cup of hot tea, coffee, or cocoa is to a very great extent due to the
 The benefit is felt at once, before the alkaloid can
 Hot water, not too

first bringing it to the boil, as pathogenic bacteria are destroyed.
find it beneficial to drink a cup of hot water the first thing in the

If fruit, succulent vegetables, or cooked food, containing much water be
without drinking; but there is danger of taking insufficient water to

Aerated drinks, except a very few of the best, and non-alcoholic beers and
foaming powders, artificial flavourings, &c.

--Tea and coffee contain an alkaloid theine, besides volatile
 Cocoa contains the milder alkaloid, theobromine.
stimulate the heart and nervous systems; tea and coffee have also a
 Formerly they were erroneously thought to lessen tissue
 These alkaloids, being purins, are open to the general objections
 Stimulants do not impart energy or force of any kind, but
&c.
 This is followed by a depression which is as
 Except, perhaps,
 Analysis of
fat.
true if it could be eaten in such quantities as are other foods (bread,
).
quantity of alkaloid.
cocoa is insignificant.
ridiculous in their pretentions, unscientific in preparation, and often

Cereals.
the form known as gluten.
loaf to be produced from wheat than from any other cereal.
of the grain is the richest in mineral matter and proteid.
shows a considerably higher proteid value than white.
of the proteid in the outer coats of the wheat berry is, however, not
nullify its seeming advantage over white bread.
branny particles in bread irritate the intestines, and cause excessive
objection, and is beneficial in preventing constipation.
value of white and brown bread has been much discussed; it depends both

made on persons unaccustomed to such foods, or the foods have been given
 To those accustomed to it good wheatmeal bread is
the latter is described as insipid.
unsatisfactory quality.
absence of which is considered a defect.
of butter, fat or oil, or by nuts, &c.
 These may

Oats contain a substance called avenin, apparently an alkaloid, which has
 It is to this that the

Prepared Cereals or Breakfast Foods.
cereal preparations by Weems and Ellis (Iowa State College Agricultural
 They report that the foods possess no nutritive value in
pre-digested foods are valueless, and no reliance can be placed on the

Oatmeal and other cereals are sold in packets as being partially cooked.
We do not doubt that they have been subjected to a dry heat, but this has
 The difference
 In rolled oats the grains are so cracked and broken,
cooks them throughout.
whether they are thoroughly cooked after the short boiling directed on the
 They are a great convenience where it is difficult to get the time
 Coarsely ground wheat is too
sold in packets, which are quite suitable.
excellent.
part of the grain.
starch converted into maltose and dextrin (maltose being a sugar), by a
 It is consequently
 It is beneficial for some
 There are several competing foods of less merit, the
objectionably salt.
persons, and for them malted food is of no special value.


the same, or is closely allied, to the casein of milk and cheese.
very rich in proteid, the dried kinds in general use, contain 24 or 25 per
 The richest is the soy-bean, which is used in China and Japan, it
, besides 19 per cent.
 Pulse requires
 Split lentils are
of the skins.
sale, are often old, and will not cook tender.
the labouring classes; the sedentary should eat it sparingly, it is liable
constipation.
other food.

favourable conditions.
large proportion of proteid matter unabsorbed.
other food was digested in a perfectly satisfactory manner.
experimenter (Rubner) found that when even the very large quantity of
 of
cent.
fed at another time.
the quantity undigested would probably have differed little from that of

Nuts are, as a rule, very rich in oil and contain a fair proportion of
 Walnuts are
much trouble.
purposes, mixed in the proportion of about two ounces to the pound of
 They can also he used in
and taste.
place of lard or butter.

capable of supplying a meal or a substantial part of one.
eaten only when the appetite has been appeased by what is considered more
 Fresh fruits contain a larger proportion of water than
nourishment is small; but we must not despise them on this account.
contains as much or more water.
contain very little water, such as the pulses and cereals when cooked
porridge.
contain even 97 per cent.
 Roast beef contains on an average 48
, and cooked round steak with fat removed 63 per cent.


be no desire to drink.
a dietary consisting of fruits with nuts, to which may be added bread and
consumed by a person taking the more customary highly cooked and seasoned
 An advantage is that the water in fruits is in a wholesome
drinking purposes.
advantages, whilst cooked and soft food discourages it.
termed stone fruits, if eaten in more than very small quantities, are apt
 Persons with good digestions can take fruit with bread,
 Fruit is more
foods.
as cereal or starchy substances, and the difficulty is said to be greater
 If the indigestion produced is due to the acid of
principles would direct that the fruit be eaten quite towards the end of
 The same consideration condemns the use of mint sauce, cucumber
green peas.
digestion of starch.
white and somewhat mealy; they should be kept until the starch has been
 Nuts
 For a portable meal, stoned raisins or other

What has been called a defect in most fruits, is the fact that the proteid
 This has been too much
proteid required.
is very high.
proteid from 10 to 12 parts of other solid nutritive constituents (any oil
ratio.
reasons for believing that it is sufficient.
analyses of American apples, a nutritive ratio of 33 was obtained.
were suggested that life should be sustained on apples alone, this small
 As the addition
objection can with justice be made against the use of fruit.
our teeth, digestive organs and general structure, and of comparative
diet.

blood properly alkaline.
uric acid in the body, they hinder its formation.
and other organic acids exist in fruits in combination with potash and
 The free acids in fruits, when
by the body and pass into the blood, not as acids, but as neutral salts.
Here they are converted into potassium carbonate or some other carbonate.
Fruit acids never make the blood acid but the reverse.
acids are antiscorbutic.
in illness.
good.
 Strawberries
extreme cases of illness when more concentrated food could not be endured.
Fruit is coming into greater use, especially owing to its better
 Fruit is not as cheap as it should be, as
comparatively little labour.
the real cost of production.
part of the cost to the consumer, goes in railway and other rates and in
 It is commonly cheaper to bring fruit from over the
English produce from one part of our country to another.
fruit would be cheaper were it not for the difficulty of buying suitable
 For the production of
culture and co-operation.

constituents or salts.
of the salts is lost.
 The fibrous
the peristaltic action of the bowels and lessening any tendency to
 Vegetables are more especially useful to non-vegetarians to

The potato belongs to a poisonous order--the _Solanacæ_.
alkaloid in the skin, but this is lost in the cooking.
sprouting portions contain the most and should be cut out.

--There are about a hundred edible species in this country, but
 It can scarcely be
manner of growth from the green or chlorophyll bearing plants, can be
 It is only the fructifying part, which appears
 It is of very rapid growth.
9 edible fungi of 4 species, obtained in the Belgrade market, the average
3 per cent.
7 per cent.
matter; the average of fat was 0.
 The food value of fungi has
 In most of the analyses given in text-books and
25 and the result
 The amount of nitrogen in a form useless for the
 Of the remainder or
half, owing to the somewhat indigestible character of the fungi.
analysis of the common mushroom gave proteids 2.
, amides
3 per cent.
7 per cent.
The fungi are of inferior nutritive value to many fresh vegetables and are
 Their chief value is as a flavouring.

vegetarians use them.
are of course alive; but they have no conscious existence, and cannot be
 An objection to their
birds are killed, and as the hens become unprofitable layers they are also
 A similar humane objection applies to the use of cow's milk by
 The calves are deprived of part of their natural food, the deficiency
 Many of
milk for human use.
slaughtered.
of exercise and pure air, crowded together, with filthy evil smelling
 With no
matter for surprise that tuberculosis is common amongst them.
lesions of tubercle (consumption) are localised and not excessive, the
it otherwise, enormous quantities of meat would be destroyed.
meat is seldom officially inspected, but a very small part is judged by
 In mitigation it may be said that
produced with but little pain, probably less pain than if left to die from
 The same cannot be said of cattle and sheep when the time
 It is argued by
responsible for the death of the animals, as they do not eat their flesh.
As vegetarians profit by conditions in which the slaughtering of the
 Cow's milk is
nutrient medium for most species of bacteria which may accidentally get
 By means of milk many epidemics have been spread, of scarlet
 Occasionally milk contains
 By boiling, all bacteria,
 Such
infants.
 or 170° F.
pathogenic germs as are at all likely to be in milk (tubercle, typhoid,
) are killed, and the value of the milk is but little
 It was until quite recently a
this has injured the vitality and caused the death of many infants.
have not yet gone quite out of use.

 On
reasons, the infant is deprived of its natural food.
been made to bring cow's milk to approximately the same composition as
 It can be done by adding water, milk sugar and cream of known
 Great difficulties are met with when
 The simplest method is that of Professor
 The proper quantity of milk sugar is added, but instead of adding
equivalent quantity of extra milk sugar is used.
theoretically satisfactory, in practice it answers very well.
found it to agree very well with infants.
quality, add half its volume of water containing 12.
 of milk
and a quarter ounce of milk sugar and half-a-pint of water.
preferable to Pasteurise by placing the bottle of milk in a vessel of
 This water is to be heated until the milk shows a temperature of
 or 165° F.
 or a change in the
 Keep at
 If not required at once, a plug
be kept in a cold place until required.
the addition of lime water.
as in human milk (the calf being a ruminating animal)--and it is a common
it cannot curdle into tough curds.
its stomach with a large quantity of watery nourishment, or else to get
 Sometimes it is necessary to peptonise the milk a
 At the Leipzig infants hospital, and also the Hygienic Institute,
 Soxhlet's mixture, except
 Milk, cheese, and
 When
 It has
of animal products, consume as much, or even more proteid of animal origin
 An excess
and milk but a very small quantity.
products, it may be said that we have become so fond of animal foods and
the transition to a dietary derived from the vegetable kingdom much
 By means of these, cooked dishes can be produced which approach

In the present state of society, when really good vegetarian fare is
convenience.

--The digestive juices contain certain unorganised ferments,
 If the food is solid, it has
 Even if already liquid it has generally to undergo a
 The
mouth, and later into the stomach.
upon by several digestive juices, and in the small intestine the nutritive

The saliva is the first digestive juice.
ferment called ptyalin.
gelatinous starch, and slowly on the raw starch.
in water, but the first product of salivary digestion is a less complex
 When time is allowed for the action to be

degree until the sixth or seventh month, and starch should not be given
 Only a small quantity should be provided before the
 Dr.
suggested that the eruption of the lower incisors from the seventh to the
pre-cooking stage of man's existence--to pierce the outer covering of
accordingly when these teeth are cut we may allow the child to bite at
 Dr.
Campbell says that starch should be given to the young, "not as is the
for it is certain that early man, from the time he emerged from the ape
all his starch in such a form.
pass down as starch into the stomach, to setup disturbance in that organ;
properly, not only will the jaws, the teeth, and the gums obtain the
but the starch will be thoroughly insalivated that much of it will be
 Hard well baked crusts constitute
 A piece of
 Later,
" Dr.
say that starch in the pappy form, or as porridge, should find no place
large proportion of our food is in a form inviting mastication.

and enabling it to be intimately incorporated with the saliva and
 The Anglo-Saxon race shows a greater
present generation are less perfect than those of previous generations.
dentist writes (_Lancet_, 1903-2, p.
examining the teeth of many natives in their more or less uncivilised
the more civilised Chinese, Japanese, and Indians of the East, and I have
under the influence of civilised life in Washington, Montreal, London,
general health may remain good.
_Lancet_ (1903-2, p.
 Harry
it increases the amount of alkaline saliva passing into the stomach, and
 That it

growth, cause the jaws to expand.
during this period, owing to the use of soft food, they do not reach their
prone to decay.
circulation in the tooth pulp, which promotes nutrition and maintains a
 Dr.

the main cause of the prevalence of caries among moderns.

 This juice
 Pepsin is only
 Starch digestion proceeds in the stomach to such
been poured out in sufficient quantity to neutralise the alkalinity of
 The gastric juice acts upon the proteids only.
the liquefied contents of the stomach are passed into the first portion
 Here it meets with the
more energetically, and only in an alkaline media.
is called trypsin.
fluids, contains other ferments; one called amylopsin, takes up the
salivary digestion.
ptyalin of the saliva, especially on uncooked starch.
pancreatic juice of infants is an indication that starch should not be
 Another ferment, stearopsin, emulsifies fats.
alkaline and assists the pancreatic juice in neutralising the acid mixture
 The
 There are some who
of food, which is too quickly eaten to be passed at once into the
quantities as the duodenal digestion can adequately treat.
used table, showing the time required for the digestion of various foods
 There is ample provision for
and starch.
secreted in ample quantities.
not be confused with the organised ferments such as yeast.
living vegetable cells, capable of indefinite multiplication.
are soluble bodies, and though capable of transforming or digesting some
restricted within definite limits.
enzymes.

to the tannin.
 Tea infused for two
when infused for thirty minutes.
had a powerful retarding effect.
as bad, but as it is usually taken much weaker, its inhibitory effect is

Bacteria are minute vegetable organisms, which exist in the dust of the

 They exist in the mouth;
digestion and health.
antiseptic, but few bacteria being able to endure its acidity.
residue of the food reaches the large intestine, bacteria are found in
 The warmth of the body is highly favourable to their
 They cause the food and intestinal _debris_ to assume its fæcal
 Should the mass be retained, the bacterial poisons accumutate
neurasthenia and other complaints.
decomposition and nitrogenous matter generally, are especially the food of
carnivora, notwithstanding their short intestines, compared with that of
 Also in the difference of the fæces of the dog when fed on
 On a rich proteid diet, especially
are greater than on a vegetable diet.
appendicitis is rare.
Institute, thinks that man's voluminous and highly developed large
copious and varied bacterial flora, could with advantage be dispensed
 He also has said that man, who could support himself on food easily
developed.
man might do with one-third of that length.
disharmony of our food and our digestive system.
and the desire of some surgeons to remove the vermiform appendix and
 Macewin,
D.
R.
 (_B.
_, 1904, 2 p.
body of ours so badly constructed that it contains so many useless parts
times, as I cannot find such imperfections in the normal human body as are
 On the contrary, the more one looks into the human body and sees
wondrous utility, beauty, and harmony of all its parts.
change, but not our organs-except by a dangerous surgical operations.
teeth with our complex and very long intestines are adapted for fibrous,
 On such food mankind has lived for an immense period
 It is true that there are several theoretical advantages in
with our digestive organs.
greater.
 An active man, leading an
inconvenience, the movements of his body favouring intestinal action;
injurious.

any food, even that which is obviously unsuitable; not only bad in kind
 Other persons have to be very careful.
have boasted that they can take of what they call the good things of life
 We know of such men who have been much
what should have been a hearty and useful middle life.
who were poorly equipped for the battle of life, with indifferent
spirits; but who, by conserving such strength as they had, have outlived
 The errors of the
 There
be quite wholesome to others.
a physiological disability, which may he overcome by an effort of the
 At other times it seems to have no connection with the imagination,
 In the
alike, but in regard to details, everyone should make rules for himself,
 When there appears no real reason for an
overcome it, to our advantage.
constitution who are most sensitive.
small quantity.
cannot be taken by many people, whilst others find them quite as
 Vegetarians can generally detect
accustomed to this fat do not object to it.
individual's tastes and habits will vary at different periods of their

One form of dyspepsia is due to undigested starch remaining in the stomach
 As long as
are removed together.
secretion, and the acid residuum causes pain, heartburn and flatulence.
there be also any butyric acid, or some other fatty acid, derived from
, there will be acid eructations.
of indigestion there are several methods of treatment.
thorough cooking of all starchy food, and it is an advantage to take a
afterwards.
ptyalin in the saliva.
farinaceous food at about 130° F.
and then to add malt extract.
minutes to half an hour or more, the starch is digested and rendered
 Such food is not very pleasant to take.
Nuts has been treated in a similar manner.
however, seems a clumsy substitute for salivary digestion.
eating of starch in the form of hard and dry biscuits, crusts and other
keeping in the mouth for a long while, during which the saliva has time to
 This is the best plan.
towards the end of the period of digestion, in order to neutralise the
 This gives relief, but does not cure, as the dose has
sometimes to be increased to an alarming extent.
from starchy foods and the substitution of an exclusive flesh dietary.
the "Salisbury" treatment, raw minced beef is given.
gives immediate relief, but its ultimate effect on the kidneys and other

No hard and fast rule can be laid down as to the number of meals into
 The stomach
the appetite is appeased.
convenient division.
 Dewey and his followers advise only two meals a
advantageous.
persons who, on account of their age and the sluggish action of their
 Children, on
ought not to be restricted to this number.
pernicious habit of greatly over-eating, and whose stomachs have become
daily food to a healthy quantity by taking only two meals.
objections against two meals are that either two little food is taken, or
it to press on the adjacent viscera.
force drawn to the over-distended stomach, depletes the brain and nervous

herbivora--is irregular and often at long intervals, gorge themselves upon
 The frugivora
should such appear.
blood stream at one time, is probably a greater tax on them.
between the usual full meals has nothing to recommend it.
burdened to little purpose, often before it has finished with one meal

Dietaries.
required for the nourishment of the body has not yet been conclusively
 The common plan is to average the dietary of large bodies of
 These dietaries have been
considered as satisfactory.

compare it with the dejecta or excretions, until a quantity and kind of

on a large number of suitable persons under varying conditions, both of
 Nearly all the experiments have been made on
a considerable quantity of flesh and alcoholic drinks.
attention has not been paid to the dietaries of the more abstemious races
 The standard daily dietary for a
stated by the best authorities as proteids from 100 to 130 grammes, fat 35
 There is a
least fat give the largest quantity of carbo-hydrate and _vice-versa_.

 Hutchison in "Food and Dietetics," sums up the quantities given by the

(23.
 N, 300 C
The nutrient ratio is 1 : 4.
 For scientific purposes, metrical weights
pounds, &c.
43 grains; 1 ounce avoirdupois = 437.
28.
 A calorie is a measure of the power of a food in

The calories used in food tables are kilo-calories, representing the
Centigrade.

day; this contains 20 grammes of nitrogen and 62 of carbon.
thoroughly consumed or utilised in the body, the heat or its equivalent in
 Proteids have, of course, an
 The factors used here, of 4.
3,
taking account only of that part of the food which is actually available
8.

Fat has a higher food value than the carbo-hydrates, as 4.
3 = 2.
or 4.
225, according to whether the old or new factors are used.
In the table of analyses 2.
 The standard dietary for a woman,
that of a man; a child of 10 to 13 six-tenths; of 2 to 5 four-tenths.
man doing hard work requires one-tenth more.
three standard dietaries, and a few actual ones, in grammes per day.
food of persons in easy circumstances, and of working men in the receipt
is higher and the carbo-hydrates proportionately less.
abundance of animal food.
detail:--
                                                 Pr't.
 C'rb.
 N.

9
.
   .
.
2
5
  or Man without muscular exercise                 90  .
.
.
  2450  6.
Football teams, Connecticut and California, U.
  226  354   634  6590  6.
Dr.
R.
--wheatmeal bread and water only (_b_)   82    8.
0
2
7 313  1560  6.

 Alexander Haig considers that 88 grammes of proteid is required by a

NOTES.

(_b_) One of a series of experiments by A.
 Blyth, 1888.
 of
a daily walk of six miles.

 Foster, 5th edition, part
, p.
 The man was in apparently
 of the proteids were

authoritatively say that such a reduction is necessarily an evil; for our
statement as to the extent to which the proteid may be reduced without
other elements of food; and this statement holds good whether the body be
"
(_d_) The Miller of Billericay's case is quoted by Dr.
by Dr.
 It was reported to the College of Physicians in 1767 by Sir
 A remarkable degree of vigour is said to have been sustained
 of flour,

A striking instance of abstemiousness is that of Cornaro, a Venetian
 Up to the age of 40
 At this
from dyspepsia, gout, and an almost continual slow fever, with an
 The skill of the best
 At length he completely changed his
 At the age of 83 he wrote a
life.
as much as weighed 12 ozs.
 I drank 14 oz.

 per
 He writes that, instead of old age
most pleasant and delightful stage of life.
maintaining a happy peace in my own mind.
that sprightliness of thought and gaiety of humour.
sound as in my youth.
walking at that age.
 He

Kumagara, Lapicque and Breis-acher, have, as the result of their
grammes.
 Hirschfeld states, as the conclusion of his research, that it
10 days) to maintain nitrogenous balance on from 30 to 40 grammes of
 Labbé and Morchoisne (Comptes Rendus, 30th May, 1904, p.
1365) made a dieting experiment during 38 days, upon one of themselves.
The proteid was derived exclusively from vegetable food.
consisted of bread, lentils, haricots, potatoes, carrots, chestnuts,
wine.
1 grammes of
3 proteid, which was gradually diminished.
11.
 N.
5 g.
 was
required for the wear and tear of the body.
food was diminished almost daily, the N.
also.
two's time was allowed, without further reduction in the food, the body
approximation of income and expenditure.
reached on the 32nd day with 1.
 = 6.
too little, as 2.
 = 13.
 On the 21st day 4.
N.
05 N.
 The inference
sufficient.
throughout, and the subject did not suffer inconvenience.
full amount of calories was kept up; as each succeeding quantity of the
non-nitrogenous food.
approved scientific manner.
generalised and positive conclusions as to the minimum quantity of proteid
covered by them was much too short.
some obscure physiological derangement.
concluding that the usual, so-called "standard dietaries" contain an
 In some practical dietaries, 50
has been accustomed to an abundance of proteid, and whose ancestors have
day (2-1/2 to 3 ounces).
should be very gradual, and a watch should be kept for any lessening of

Some comments may now be made upon the table of dietaries.
London sewing girl contained 53 grammes of proteid, which should have been
badly nourished.
deficient in carbo-hydrates; this latter is shown by the low number of
 The long hours and unhealthy conditions of work, and not a
of such persons.
although some persons have said as much.
German vegetarians, but the calories appear satisfactory.
German labourer's family the calories are too low.
 T.
 Allinson's
82 grammes of proteid would have been insufficient.
smaller quantity of proteid would have been enough if the fat and
 The calories are below the usual
 In the succeeding example the calories are considerably higher,

of overlooking the other constituents.
 Alexander Haig in "Diet and
 8, cites the case of a boy aged 10, fed on 2-1/4 pints of milk
 The boy lost weight, and Dr.
of milk was very deficient in proteid; more than twice as much being
 2-1/4 pints of milk contain about 45 grammes of proteid,
requires 75 g.
 is however, higher, allowing for the
table.
 Haig has overlooked the
for the boy's loss of weight.
g.
 is the necessary quantity.
too rich in proteid matter to form, with advantage, the sole food of a
 Human milk contains much less in proportion to the other

The old doctrine enunciated by Justus von Liebig was that proteid matter
 He afterwards
thoroughly investigated.
either from their own ignorance of modern research or their wish to take
proteid matter alone nourishment.
entitled to be called nourishment.

of proteid matter required, is that in the opinion of many eminent writers
 They have stated that it is impossible to
excessive quantity of carbo-hydrates.
given in Kirke's Physiology, as edited by Morrant Baker, a standard work,
much used in elementary science schools: "The daily waste from the system
(or 20 grammes).
 In
he would have to eat nearly 4-1/4 lbs.
.
.
take about double the quantity of carbon required in order to obtain the
.
.
lean meat only.
he must eat no less than 6-1/2 lbs.
.
.
similar waste of nitrogen, the removal of which would give an undue amount
.
.
mixed diet of bread and meat as will supply all the requirements of the
" (These
 The figures and
quotation which are the briefest and most suitable; certain calculations
) "A combination of bread and meat would supply much more
.
 so that 3/4 lbs.
than 2 lbs.
but little waste.
the best and most economical food for man; and the result of experience
grounds only.
almost the same figures and argument.

ridiculous conclusions.
sufficient flesh forming substance for a day's ration, but a very much
 On the other
 of pears would have
although the carbon would be in excess.
proper quantity of each that would make a theoretically perfect dietary.
People are apt to assume that what they themselves eat, or what their
far as the elementary constituents and quantities are concerned.
is in attempting to make a vegetarian diet, however contrary to common
agree in composition with the ordinary lavish flesh dietary of the
 It is significant that John Bull is caricatured with
his hearty dining on flesh, coarse food and alcoholic drinks.
short lived individual.
is possible to combine purely vegetable foods so as to give the required
carbo-hydrates.
H.
elaborate analyses and dietary tables, how this can be accomplished by
 He takes Forster and Voit's
suitable deduction for the smaller weight of the Indians.
of daily rations he gives from 5 to 9 ounces of various beans, balanced
little oil.
would cause discomfort to most persons.
Indians who are strict vegetarians could consume such quantities.

fruitarians, at the Californian Agricultural Experimental Station, July,
E.
 The proportion of food, both
 The research is
during a short period only; but that to which the family were accustomed.
The family consisted of two women and three children; they had all been
during the experiment.
uncooked.
detailed in the bulletin.
m.
consisted of nuts followed by fruits.
m.
when they usually ate no nuts, substituting olive oil and honey.
used were almonds, Brazil, pine, pignolias and walnuts; the fresh fruits

 One
cereal food.
of the food constituents in grammes:--Proteids, fat, carbo-hydrate, crude
 The crude fibre is classed as
the nutrient ratio.

 Fat.
 Fibre.
  N.

the other subjects was under observation was from 20 to 28 days.

grammes of proteids and 2,500 calories; it is thus seen that the quantity
 The
no physical exercise.
people need far less raw than cooked food.
less in quantity than in the previous dietary.
fact that the subject was, for part of the time at least, under great
 Even this small amount
needs, enabling her to do her customary housework and take care of her two
 (_c_) This girl
she never looks nor feels so well when she has much starchy food, and
of its superiority.
years old and of average activity, is not far from 90 grammes of proteids
and in excellent health and spirits.
experiment, there was an increase in weight of 2 pounds, due to the fact
provided was more abundant during the study.
very delicate as a baby.
under the average weight, and 7 inches less than the average height.
interesting to note that her only gain in weight during the past year was
 This was due
the food was provided by those making the study.
the tentative standard for a child of 1 to 2 years old, but the subject
 She impressed one as
 (_ee_) The subject
8 months, her seventh birthday occurred during the time.

all the subjects were decidedly under-nourished, even making allowance for
 But when we consider that the two adults have lived
capable of more work than they ever were before, we hesitate to pronounce
 The three children had the appearance of health and strength.
They ran and jumped and played all day like ordinary healthy children, and
childhood.
fruitarian almost from infancy was certainly undeveloped.
two years younger than she was.
below the average in development, whose dietaries conform to the ordinary
such investigations are made.

"standard" quantity of proteids, but also of the carbo-hydrates and fats.
It is generally said by those who have no practical experience amongst
do those who include flesh.
much less.
staying power, and a much longer period can be allowed between meals,
alcohol consumer, suffers.
stimulating character and its slower digestion.
by the success of vegetarians in feats of strength and endurance, and
finished long walking, cycling, tennis, and other matches.
attempt to prolong their powers of endurance by flesh extracts and
condition.
with our English soldiers, of simple feeding men, such as the Zulus, Turks
 It is often said that vegetable
bodily organs more.
vegetables, the grains, and unripe fruit, it would be quite true, but it
 A slowness of digestion
 As vegetables,
undergo the greater part of their digestion there, a gentle and slow
 It may also
such a stimulating character, as to be hurried along the digestive tract.
Digestion is for the most part a chemical process.
kind and quantity, thoroughly masticated, assisted if necessary by
any sensible expenditure or energy or consciousness of its accomplishment.
There is nothing improbable in a flesh-eater requiring more food than a
 His food contains more proteid, and
organs and overtax the excretory ones.
condiments, salt, and elaborate cooking, often also of alcohol; if a man,
 He lives, as it were, at high pressure.

necessity of a large proportion of proteid, especially when the diet has
 These experiments are inconclusive, because the
alcoholic drinks.
cannot be made, and the digestive organs expected to adapt themselves in
 Perhaps not even a month or a year would suffice, for some
 In some experiments the
reluctance or even loathing; an excess of some food has been eaten which

Sometimes persons on changing from an ordinary flesh dietary, lose weight
 Generally, it is found that they have done little more than
 Authorities
such foods as pulse, wheatmeal, oatmeal, eggs, milk, cheese, and such as a
 This
comparatively insipid character of the food and want of appetite.
making a change to a vegetarian diet, such foods had better be taken that
and manner of cooking to that used previously.
simpler diet can afterwards gradually be made, according to conviction,
 It must not be expected that a change,
immediate and proper response from digestive and assimilative organs which
generations, to another manner of living.
produced from centrifugalised milk--that is milk from which the butter fat
 These have a value in

of our food contains an abundance of proteid, and we can easily limit the

The later apologists for a flesh diet have had to admit that it is not a
theory somewhat as follows.
over that necessary for its special province of producing tissue, is

passes off in the form of urea by the kidneys.
that at the moment the nitrogen portion is liberated, it in some manner
neighbourhood to a higher state of activity.

them.
 Sir
D.
 16 says that "high
systematic use of alcoholic beverages, and that low-feeding consists in a
that the high-fed classes and races display, on the whole, a richer
 That "it
and gout is usually produced either by personal or ancestral
" We can only spare room for a few remarks on this subject.
Intellectual and business ability brings wealth, wealth frequently leads
sustained effort and clearness of mind.
such high livers are usually common-place, intellectually, and of
 The aristocracy who are generally high livers,
are not as a rule famed for their intellectual gifts.
the frugal living Japanese soldier has proved himself the most enduring
and tactful than the wealthier, high-fed Russian officers, with their
 What is called high-feeding, is of the greatest
nervous disorders.

--In addition to the nutrients and the small
generally contains small quantities of substances which are difficult to
 Many
 To them, various
, owe much of their characteristic differences of
 When pure the proteids and starches are devoid of taste.
and fats as are generally eaten have also but little flavour, providing
 The sugars differ from
 The free
consumed in small quantities.

body or of some organ without sensibly imparting nourishment.
may be one of stimulation or of depression.
medicinal action, a food adjunct for its modifying action on food.
impossible to give a quite satisfactory definition, or to draw sharp
 For example, tea, coffee, alcohol and tobacco are sometimes
their action and the definition of the terms food adjuncts, drugs and
 The difference of grouping often depends upon intensity rather
 If taken frequently and not in quantity sufficient
adjuncts or supplementary foods, although much may be said in favour of a
 The volatile oils of mustard, caraway, cloves, etc.
used in medicine; also the alkaloids of coffee and cocoa.
used as a mild laxative for infants; that is, as a drug.
between a drug and a poison is one only of degree.
esteemed drugs have to be administered in very small quantities, or they
g.

Classifications are necessary for methodical study, and for assisting the

demarkation, but according to man's knowledge and convenience; hence a
first consideration they appeared quite distinct.
often leads to confusion and useless discussions.

or waste matters to get out of the way.
organs for the purpose; waste matter remains in the flesh and blood of
 In plants are found a large number of powerful volatile
 Many of these are, in all

flowers insects assist fertilisation.
flavouring substances in fruits attract birds and animals.
the fruits cause the seeds, which are uninjured by passing through the
the plant species.
oils, resins, etc.
animals, birds, caterpillars, snails, etc.
most abundant in the bark, husk, skin and outer parts.
supposed that the food on which each animal, including man, subsists, is
 This is an error, for each
with more or less success, against destruction by its competitors and
 Each species of animal selects from its surroundings such food as
 Such food may not be theoretically perfect; that is, it
but during the long period of evolution, each species of animal has become
 If to such animals be given
digested by laboratory tests made independently of the living animal,
refuse to work properly, just as the furnace of a steam boiler, made to
 Many scientific men have
general consumption, in the most concentrated and soluble form, thinking

The Volatile and Essential Oils are contained in minute quantity in a
 They contribute in part
 They are the cause of the pungency and aroma of
sage and other spices.
 When extracted
 In moderate quantities they are

secretion of gastric juice and peristaltic movement.

tobacco and opium.
be classed amongst the food adjuncts.
their active principles enter the body by the mouth and saliva or the

The Extractives, as they are called, comprise a number of bodies of
 They especially exist in flesh and flesh extracts.
these are the purins.

Alcohol is to some extent a true food, but its stimulant and other

There are other bodies such as the resins and bitters.
principle of Indian hemp is a resin.

stimulants may advantageously be used.
nearly all nations, either alcohol in some form or one of the stronger
 From this fact it is sometimes argued that
 The same method of reasoning
 Such conclusions
 If the extensive or even universal
justification, either now or in the past, for war, lying, avarice and
 It is strange that drugs differing so greatly in their
coffee and tobacco should be used.
much used stimulants are useful, there is an end to the argument based on
 There is no doubt that the use of stimulants in more
see what physiological advantage there can be in their habitual use, to
 Sometimes they are taken for a
satisfies.
it is chiefly on account of the apparent enjoyment.
the depressed in body and mind crave most for stimulants.
energy in the body, including the nervous system, and this is the only
 A mere stimulant does not create but draws
 What was latent energy--to become in the natural
is consequently, subsequent depletion of energy.
times when a particular organ needs a temporary stimulus to increased
are so rare that they may be left out of our present argument, and
advice.
has steadily diminished, its poisonous properties having become more

There is a general similarity in the effects of stimulants on the
 The most largely used stimulant is ethyl
principal effects.
quantities, first stimulates the digestive organs.
inflame the stomach and stop digestion.
altogether out of proportion to the alcohol it contains.
increases the action of the heart, increases the blood pressure, and
skin; hence there is a feeling of warmth.
cold he now feels warm.
the various organs is that they work with greater vigour, hence the mental
increased.
always the case; some have a headache or feel very sleepy.
repeatedly proved that these good results are but transitory.
although at first stimulated, is more exhausted after the action of the
 This is true of all the
 In consequence of the dilatation
the body is cooled.
cold.
cold, it has often happened that those who resorted to spirit drinking
 Insurance statistics
so-called moderate drinkers.
the excessive drinking of alcohol, or the use of other strong stimulants
concerned with what is vaguely called their moderate use.

of alcohol.
 The
ceases after a week or more of use.
nervous system.

life to their full, without any bad effect, and looking over a few years,
 Some of us have known of such men,
suddenly broken down at what should have been a hearty middle life.
other hand there are men who were badly equipped for the battle of life,
animal spirits, but who with care have long outlived all their formerly

Simple versus Highly-flavoured Foods.
what extent condiments and flavourings should be used.
stimulating properties, although differing from the more complex
 The great differences in the
general rule.
temperament; though doubtless the national temperament is often due in
 Some races are content with the simplest
cereals, wheat, oatmeal, etc.
 On the other hand there are
curry, pickles, pepper, strong cheese, meat extracts, rancid fats, dried
various disgusting things.
appetite, the half-frozen, half-putrid head and fins of the seal, after
 In Burmah and Sumatra a
is frequently allowed to become partially putrid.
condiment for mixing with their rice.
be given.
been consumed with relish by some tribe or other.
and to our minds most disgusting foods are eaten by the least intelligent
 It is hunger that compels the poor African bushman
entrails of cattle which die naturally, and this last he has come to think
 All this shows a wonderful range of
such food is equally wholesome.
especially the more delicately organised of them are the most fastidious,
flavoured foods.

influences to a remarkable degree.
nausea commonly produced by the first pipe of tobacco, and the way the
quantity without manifesting any unpleasant feelings, but to receive
 Opium or laudanum may be taken in gradually
produced death, yet now without causing any immediate or very apparent
 Nearly all drugs loose much of their first effect on continued use.
Not only is this so, but a sudden discontinuance of a drug may cause
it has become habituated, falls into a sluggish or torpid condition.
the enjoyment of food two things are equally necessary, a healthy and keen
skilfully prepared, will give satisfaction.
certain of the papilloe of the tongue, and to a much less degree in the
 Tastes may be classified into sweet, bitter, acid and saline.
Sweet tastes are best appreciated by the tip, acid by the side, and bitter
 Hot or pungent substances produce sensations of
be present at the same time.
solution.
cultivation.
appropriate.
of fruit, etc.
due to the nose.

stimulate the appetite and digestion.
food will not be eaten in sufficient quantity.
very elaborate) have been published for this purpose.
to increase the enjoyment of food.
dietary is the most elaborate--is especially subject to digestive
appetite, no food will give full gustatory pleasure.
food, and that which can be eaten most frequently without weariness, is
 Plain bread is an example; whereas
, though agreeable in small quantity, or
 Rice is the poorest
generally, made more tasty by the addition of fish, curry, etc.
of the Chinese live on rice, with the exception of only 3 or 4 ounces of
 The Japanese
 In India rice is the food most in use,
 Other races live chiefly on
 It appears that the digestive organs will perform their functions
 There is nothing surprising in
 The strongest, most intelligent, and largest animals are those which
 Even the African lion is no match for the
 The lion and tiger are capable of great strength, but they cannot
 Our most useful
than any of the carnivora.
much less than that of one of the carnivora of the same weight.
whether we take the cost of purchasing the food; or the expenditure of
production of the food.
more abundantly and freely than the corresponding quantity of sheep, deer,
, on which the carnivora feed.

characteristic of the Anglo-Saxon, and to a less extent of some other

spasmodic, and for a time perhaps, great intellectual and physical
 Simpler food favours
contentment.
live on simple food have either clear intellects or are contented, because
easily retained or obtained under that condition.
the over-fed and badly fed are the most irritable and discontented Those
chief successes in feats of short duration.
individuals or races excel in laborious work requiring endurance over long
military campaigns.

we have written, in proper proportion and quantity, and in a fairly
 Within these very wide and comprehensive limits, the
 Very much of the great difference in food is due to
part which is essential and nourishing.
few; whilst what is at present the pleasantest, influences the many.
ego, the superphysical conscious and reasoning entity should rule its
 The body, being the servant of the
master, becomes a docile subject.
nearly as easily as into bad ones; often more easily, as bad habits are
 The body being once habituated to certain
pleasure therefrom and resists change.
,
less painful.
stimulants and elaborately prepared foods; but after ruling all this out,
them: hereon each individual must form his own opinion.
left, the same kind is not equally suitable to everyone, nor even to the

A delicately balanced, fine-grained, high-toned mind and body responds to

doubtless best and conducive to purity and clearness of thought.
coarse-grained, badly poised, roughly working body and spirit, is
appetite is gratified, not by simple but by coarsely seasoned foods.

especially if well-seasoned, finds a simple diet unsatisfying.
persons dine off simple vegetarian food, there is a tendency to
 The less stimulating food fails to rouse the digestive organs
consumed.
eat a larger quantity of food if it be vegetable.
fulness and flatulence result from their over-feeding, they lay the blame
 Most persons, on
appearance and flavour and even in the names.
inducement that the food may be attractive and palatable to friends who
 After
 They revert to
mild-flavoured foods rather than savouries.
rule, cares much less for fruits.
variety of foods can be prepared, but the differences in taste are much
 The effect of seasoning instead of
flavours.
 The
particular or distinct flavours are obscured, resulting in a general
 It is often stated that as an ordinary flesh-eater has the
obtain more enjoyment, and that the latter is disagreeably restricted.
Certainly he has the choice, but does he avail himself of it to any
whether of animal or vegetable that are possible.
very few kinds are eaten.
largely of flesh-foods will reject as insipid and unsatisfying many
 The vegetarian may abstain
reasons, but because they are unpleasant.
choose between the mere range of flavours that give enjoyment to each
 The sense of taste is in its character and range lower
 The cultivation of the taste for
 The
of little flavour and monotonous; but they eat with every sign of
flavour.
the great varieties of grasses commonly found together in a pasture.

 They
of that required for warmth: the extra time in preparing, mixing and
and soiled utensils which have to be cleaned.
generally much nicer eaten hot, and this necessitates fires and attention
 We have already said that soft cooked food
 Our elaborate
the eating of flesh would receive a great impetus on the discovery of the
 Flesh can only be eaten with relish and with safety when
 Such a large proportion of it is infected with parasites, or is
palatable in such a state.
raw or semi-cooked form, parasitic diseases are common.
least doubt that our habit of eating so much cooked food is responsible
 In regard to
prepared foods, the advantages of cooking seem overwhelmingly great.
our present imperfect knowledge and conflicting opinions, it is
question requires careful and impartial investigation.
been made with animals, chiefly pigs, with cooked and uncooked clover,
 (U.
 Department of Agriculture).
the food was more or less diminished in digestibility by cooking.
13 separate series of experiments with pigs in different part of the
 In 10 of these trials there has been a
 The amount of food required to
been cooked than when it was given raw.
quantity of food required after cooking was considerable.

nourishment is required.
eaten more slowly, there is a better flow of saliva and time is given for
finally for the appeasing of the appetite.
the fruitarian family, whose food was uncooked, and of whom we have
that thought necessary, even after making full allowance for their small

Meat Extracts.
first to attempt to make these on the commercial scale.
method in 1847, and this not proving satisfactory, another one in 1865.
stated that the only practicable plan on a manufacturing scale, was to
was to be raised to 180° F.
for half-an-hour.
etc.
evaporated to a soft extract; such a preparation is practically free from
matter having been extracted.
required to produce 1 pound of extract.
extract of meat are nutritive in the ordinary sense," and he went on to
 Druit, in 1861, in describing the
stimulating action on the brain, and he proposed it as an auxiliary and
attended with cerebral depression or despondency.
of animal food in savages, whose customary diet was almost exclusively
and stimulation similar to that of intoxicating spirits.
have been observed from a copious employment of Liebig's extract.
asserts, from the results of his experiments, that extract of meat is
opinion, although they may value it as a stimulant and drug.
Pharmacopæia_, 1901, states that "Liebig's Extract or Lemco consists of
salts.
healthy persons; still it is often valuable as a flavouring to add to
, and it is a nerve food allied to tea.
extracts stimulate the action of the heart and the digestive processes,
depression.
in the universal suitability of concentrated beef-tea is frequently
in conditions of kidney inefficiency, of producing positive harm.
the meat bases, the leucomaines, have been found to possess marked
 The manfacturers of meat extracts continue
products.
30, 40 or 50 times their weight of fresh meat, or that one or two
 One company, asserts by direct
in an ox can be concentrated into the bulk of a bottle of extract; and

urine in a tea-cup would be much nearer the fact, for the meat extract
resemble in constitution the urine than they do the flesh of the ox.
Professor Robert Bartholow has also stated that the chemical composition
substance than a food.
meat-broth, for the purpose of preparing therefrom a nutrient for
in odour and colour to urine.
untruthfulness and the absurdity of the statements made by manufacturers
 Fresh lean beef contains about 25
 of solid nutriment and 75 per cent.
 If lean beef be
substance; this will consist of about 80 per cent.
nearly 20 per cent.
extractives.
 If
constituents, the membraneous matter, the creatin, creatinine and purin
 It is very
substance or proteid and the fat, are rejected in making Liebig's extract,
 In Bovril and some other
a definite food value.
alleged that the preparations were immensely superior in nutritive value
 The Bovril Company extensively circulated the
at home from the choicest fresh beef contains absolutely no nourishment
 It is so, however, and many a
the meat extracts that are sold to the public.
so much that one ounce of its nutritious constituents contains more real
" If
principal part of Bovril is the meat bases and other things common to all
condemn.
difference, is the only nourishing constituent, it is difficult to see the
proportionate cost.
A.
"Flesh Foods," writes: "As this amounts to at most some 8 or 10 per cent.
it is obvious that a large quantity of the substance would be required to
 On the other
powder suspended in meat extract is more digestible than ordinary flesh in
principal stimulating agents, is correspondingly reduced.
added albumin and meat fibre, A.
 Allen, in "Commercial Organic
 iv.
such a quantity of meat extract as is usually, or could be, taken at a
"
advertised to contain "the entire nourishment of prime ox-beef.
extent of the extract of meat trade is shown by a circular issued by the
 They give the number of their cattle killed since
branches, 3,200.
 It is a sad
and brutalising surroundings of the slaughter-house to such a purpose--the
 Reliance on these extracts is
 Instead of their preventing
them by overloading the body with waste products, taxing the excretory
 The following analyses of meat extracts

                               Water.
  tin.
  Fibre.

's Extractum Carnis  15.
34  5.
12
97  0.
31    --     --
's Extractum Carnis 17.
38  4.
81
's Meat Juice       55.
10  0.
00    --
's Essence of Beef  89.
06  5.
Valentine's Meat juice         55.
10  0.
25    --
34  1.
81    --    5.
Bovril for Invalids            24.
07  4.
87
                               Albu-  Pep-   Meat
 tones.
  Ash.
Liebig Co.
01   8.
32  23.
Armour's Extract of Meat        1.
13  41.
36
's Extractum Carnis  4.
16  38.
80
's Meat Juice        1.
50  12.
06
's Essence of Beef   0.
57   3.
00
00   2.
48  12.
Bovril Company's Fluid Beef     8.
18  19.
67
56   6.
07  16.

some even, is almost entirely, if not altogether made from yeast.
latter can be manufactured at a very low cost from brewers' and
unscrupulous dealers to substitute it secretly.
prepared from yeast have the appearance and taste of meat extracts, but
 In one method of
more than very small quantities as a flavouring.
 Graff has made
(see _Analyst_ 1904, page 194), and says, "It will be seen that the
meat extract.
equally as injurious as meat extracts.
odour is suggestive to us of putrefaction) should be discouraged by those

Flesh Bases and Waste Products.
metamorphosis or the wearing out of the body, there remain certain waste
 Their retention
 A part is expelled by the
termed, carbonic acid.
other nitrogenous matter, the nitrogen is left in comparatively simple
 These effete nitrogen compounds are commonly termed flesh
 They exist in small quantity in flesh
beef-extract.
liver, break these down into still simpler compounds, so that the kidneys
body.
bodies of men and many other mammals in the form of urea.
odourless transparent crystalline substance, of cooling saline taste like
 It is soluble in an equal volume of water, and is expelled from the
 In the herbivora the nitrogenous waste takes the
 The nearly solid light-coloured
acid in combination with alkalies.
excreted, there is also a little hippuric and uric acid or compounds of
 Uric acid is a transparent colourless crystalline body almost
 As
great affinity for any colouring matter that is present.


 Some of these occur
caffeine, occur in plants.
substance.
32 per cent.
0.
, and in beef 0.
 Creatinine is produced from
 Both creatine and
 A series of bases, closely allied

 When administered to
sleep and in some cases causing vomiting and purging in a manner similar

and are termed leucomaines.

these differ from the leucomaines, being produced by putrefactive or
 The poisoning which has occasionally
, is

Such quantities of waste products as are produced in the healthy body are
 Either
excessive quantity and not eliminated with sufficient rapidity; in
 Those who eat largely of flesh,
super-added to the excretory matter resulting from the vital processes of

has produced severe symptoms of poisoning.
limb bleeding and mangled in a most cruel steel trap, the struggles which
days of torture, has produced in their bodies virulent poisons.
poisons have also been produced by the violent and prolonged exertions of
spent.
way to violent anger or other emotion, and the child at the breast has
 We must not expect the flesh of any hunted or
 Animals brought in cattle ships across
 After rough weather they will often arrive
 To this is added the terror and
often through a crowded city, to the slaughter house to which they have an
 It is only to be expected that the dead flesh from such
flesh bases.

--The term purin has been applied to all bodies containing
 It comprises the xanthine group and the uric acid
 The principal purins are hypoxanthin, xanthin, uric acid,
 Purins in the body may either
called endogenous purins; or they are introduced in the food, when they
 These purins are waste products and
 The production of some uric acid by
purins in food is under control.

diseases.
joints and surrounding tissues.
with ensuing great pain.
about the joints.
stated).

Very many are the hypotheses which have been propounded on the cause of
greatly modified.
subject, there remains much that is obscure.
surrounded with great difficulties, and would not be suitable for
uric acid as the cause of gout and several other diseases, are at the
pamphlets.
either of chemistry or physiology, and treat the question as though it
 Our purpose is to clear the
and to warn against dogmatism.
 It is
liberally of alcoholic drinks, are prone to diseases of the liver and
 Flesh meat contains
 Purins are metabolised in the body
as such, being disintegrated, whilst the other half remains to be excreted

One view is that whilst the organs of the body can readily dispose of its
with the small amount of uric acid derived from most foods, the organs are
rich in purins: that there is an accumulation in the system of some of
 Vegetable foods tend to keep the blood alkaline, flesh
favourable to the elimination of uric acid, whilst anything of an acid
 Dr.
man who eats what is called ordinary diet with butcher's meat twice a day,
accumulated 300 to 400 grains of uric acid in his tissues, and possibly
his body, he will probably be subject to attacks of some form of gout or
" Dr.
system, not only gout and rheumatism, but epilepsy, hysteria, mental and

The opinion of the majority of eminent medical men, during recent years,
not an irritant to the tissues, and that it is readily excreted in the
 Some of the reasons for this latter and against the
from gout--the nodular concretions, sometimes found about their joints and
blood contains more uric acid than that of man, and the solid matter of
 If uric acid caused gout we should
 It is a remarkable fact that the
such widely differing classes of animals as birds and serpents.
have a higher body temperature than man, they are very rapid in their
weight.
 Serpents, on the other
while without food.
urea and others uric acid.
unirritating form in which waste nitrogen is expelled from the body of the
surprising if a very much smaller quantity acts as a poison in man.
physicians are convinced that uric acid is absolutely unirritating.
deposits may occur to an enormous extent in gouty persons without the
 Urates have been injected in large
with no toxic result whatever, or more than purely local irritation.
most careful investigations upon the excretions of persons suffering from
excess of that in normal individuals, except during the later stage of an
 There is an excess of uric acid in the blood of gouty
probable, that this excess is not due to over production or deficient
 The excess may
suitable substance in the blood, which assists its passage through the
 Under the head of gout are classed a number of unrelated
sole bond of union is that they are accompanied by an excess of urates,
 This is why there
contradictions and vagaries in gout.
that uric acid is not in the free state in the body.
combination with alkalies as urates, perhaps also with some organic body.
It has been shown that the blood of the gouty is not saturated with uric
diminished.
to be absent in some persons, and rarely, if ever reaches the quantity
 Leukaemia is a disease marked by an excessive and
progressive anæmia.
produced in persons whilst being fed with thymus gland (sweetbread), for
 In neither of these cases are any of the symptoms of
 In the urine of children, it is not unusual to find a

The symptoms of gout point to the presence of a toxin in the blood, and it
being secondary.
decomposing fæcal matter in the large intestine.
digestion and insufficient or defective intestinal secretions and
 This explains why excessive feeding, especially of proteid
 The imperfectly digested residue of such food, when left
poisons which are absorbed in part, into the system.
produces headache, migraine, gouty or other symptoms.
general failure of gouty persons to absorb the proper amount of nutriment
further increase of fæcal decomposition and thus aggravates matters.
voluminous bowel or colon of man is a legacy from remote pre-human
vegetable matters.
is highly cooked.
bacteria of numerous species, though chiefly of the species known as the
inhabitant of the intestinal tract in man and animals.
even thought to be useful in breaking down the cellulose, which forms a
 Flesh meat leaves a residue in which
 Poisons such as
 It is believed
favourable to the growth of the bacteria of putrefaction, or that they are
 It has generally
 This seems
to which it is liable producing lactic acid--the souring of milk.
growth of most bacteria, particularly the putrefactive kinds are hindered


Dr.
they contain uric acid.
butcher's meat.
but a very small quantity.

 Haig has used a method of analysis which is quite incapable of giving
 Many vegetarians have accepted these figures and his
consequence.
 I.
from "The Purin Bodies in Food Stuffs.
has proved a very difficult process.
 Hall has devoted much time to
accepted with confidence.

second column purin bodies in grains per pound:--
Sweet bread         10.
4
75  19.
Beef steak           2.
5
30   9.
Ham                  1.
1
3    9.
Rabbit               0.
3
21   8.
Veal loin            1.
14
96   6.
Salmon               1.
15
58   4.
Lentils and haricots 0.
16
53   3.
Peameal              0.
54
21   1.
Onions               0.
06
02   0.

lettuce, cauliflower and eggs.
cheese consequently must contain still less.

 Hall show that the purins of food are metabolised or
any slight retention being due to increased capillary pressure.
of the purins remain undigested, the quantity depending upon the
 Two rabbits had
a man in proportion to his weight, would have been 17 and 3 grains
 These rabbits showed malnutrition, and after death
 Dr.
made a large number of personal experiments, and says that when he has
77 grains of guanin or 7 to 15 grains of uric acid, apparently associated
 In
without effect on the healthy subject, may prove a source of irritation to

Professor Carl von Noorden says of gout, "with regard to treatment we are
avoided, and those words embody almost all there is to be said as to
 Alcohol is very injurious in gout.
dangerous remedy.
" Dr.

most overwhelming importance and value in the treatment of gout and
source; first, by sweeping out both the alimentary canal primarily, and
body cells that abundant salt-water bath in which alone they can live and
" Dr.
the one active agent in all the much vaunted mineral waters is nothing
 "Their alleged solvent effects are now known
" The value consists in "plain water, plus
springs and the excellent hygienic rules.

take lentils, haricots and some other foods; sometimes, even eggs and milk
 This is not for the alleged reason that they contain
are unequal to the task.
 Haig's
disputed by many eminent physicians, his treatment by excluding flesh and
digestion by the weakly, is a wise one.
value in very many cases.

various stages and in several ways; there may be either deficient or
 Thus there are exceptions, where gouty
only been relieved by the giving up of milk foods or starch foods (see
, p.
, p.

Those particularly interested in the subject of the purins and gout are
Dr.
, p.
discussion on "The Chemical Pathology of Gout" before the British Medical
, p.

Dr.
 Keith, in "Fads of an Old Physician," has a chapter on
fifty years ago.
the diet had consisted largely of beef and mutton, and this although he
in a child or youth who had not been fed on red meat.
being exceedingly common in Buenos Ayres and Rosario in the Argentine
disease there.
young is enormous.
neuralgia both in old and young.
 Haig relates how he suffered from

called extractives, it is probable that such quantities have an injurious
 That an
disease is undoubted, but opinions differ as to how the injury is brought

On thorough Mastication.
and constituents of food required per day and have criticised the usually
 We have since read a valuable contribution to the
 Horace Fletcher in his book, "The A.
-Z.
nutrition" (F.
 Stokes & Co.
 Ten years previous to the
wreck, although he was trained as an athlete in his youth and had lived an
 He had contracted a degree of physical
 This unexpected
strong personal effort to save himself.
food and too much needless worry.
you are really hungry and are not pampering false appetite.
appetite that will relish plain bread alone is not present, wait for it,
 Then chew, masticate, munch, bite, taste
liquefied and made neutral or alkaline by saliva, but until the reduced
excites the swallowing impulse into a strong inclination to swallow.
swallow what has collected and has excited the impulse, and continue to
disappears in response to the swallowing impulse.
this will become an agreeable and profitable fixed habit.
 Fletcher has
 Professor
H.
experiments of Kumagawa, Sivén, and other physiologists; who have shown
per day equal to only one-half and one-quarter the amount called for in
 32), even without unduly increasing the total
 Such investigations, however, have always
current standards, as extending over too short periods of time.

 Chittenden writes that he has had in his laboratory, for several
F.
certain degree of abstinence in the taking of food and attained important
with marked improvement in his general health.
fully satisfies his appetite, but no longer desires the amount of food
 For a period of thirteen days, in January,
 The daily
25 grammes, the body-weight (165
 Analysis of the excretions showed
 In February a more
 The diet was quite simple, and
 This
as giving sufficient variety for his needs and quite in accord with his
 No attempt was made to conform to any given standard of quantity,
appetite craved.
9 (1.
ounces), fats 38.
0, calories 1,606.
of nitrogen per day was 7.
90.
says Professor Chittenden, was this diet at all adequate for the needs of
said that the appetite was satisfied and that the subject had full freedom
 The body-weight remained practically
 An

 W.
 Anderson, the director
 Dr.
last days of the experiment, in February, 1903, Mr.
same kind of exercises as are given to the 'Varsity crew.
and fatiguing and cannot be done by beginners without soreness and pain
 They are of a character to tax the heart and lungs as well as
 "My conclusion, given in
 Fletcher performs this work with greater ease
condition I have ever worked with.
of this report, it must be remembered," writes Professor Chittenden, "that
 Fletcher had for several months past taken practically no exercise
" Sir Michael Forster
 Fletcher and others under observation in his Cambridge
bowel being not only greatly reduced in amount, as might be expected; but
inoffensive, and assuming a condition which suggests that the intestine is
circumstances.
 Fletcher
expenditure of energy required for digestion.
succeeding digestive processes are more easily and completely performed.
What is also of great importance is that there is not the danger of the
and decomposing residue, to poison the whole body.
daily defæcation, there is often still this slowly shifting mass; the end
period.
vitality for use in other directions, a greater capacity for work and

Professor R.
 Chittenden, in "Physiological Economy in Nutrition,"
the conviction that the minimum proteid requirements of the healthy man,
dietary standards, and far below the amounts called for by the acquired
 Body weight, health, strength, mental
of the proteid food ordinarily consumed.

unnecessary, but inadvisable to diet ourselves according to any of the old
have been very thoroughly revised.
becomes accustomed to simpler food, a smaller quantity of the food is
 The proportion of proteids to other constituents in all the
eaten, may be taken as sufficient.
compiled in conformity with certain proteid standards and also with some
food which it is imagined should be eaten each day.
should be calculated to accord with the weight, temperament, age and sex
 The dietaries that we
 This high
quantities they are not generally admissible, and in some of the dietaries
 The difficulty is got over by the liberal use of eggs,
 To admit a necessity for these animal products is to show

replacing those of the beef-tea, chicken-broth, jelly and arrowroot order.
They provide a half-way stage between flesh and vegetable food, such as is
stimulating foods.
excite the prejudice of the ordinary medical practitioner or nurse.
Possibly, also, a higher quantity of proteid may be required on first

The Use of Salt.
the extensive use of common salt or sodium chloride.
shop bread, in large quantity in a special and much advertised cereal
 It is added
still more at the time of eating.
without one or more salt-cellars.
ounce, or an ounce per day.
is necessary or not, but whether there is a sufficient quantity already
 Some allege that there is an essential difference
 That the former is
organised or in organic combination and nutritive.
being convinced that there is a difference in food value.
animals are attracted by salt, but not the carnivora.
explained by the fact that potassium salts are characteristic of plants,
of flesh.
potash salts as the carnivora.
of the herbivora and frugivora is obtained from the vegetable matter
it from salt-licks and mineral sources.
storing up the sodium chloride from plants in sufficient quantity, whilst
 There is no justification for saying that they
 If the ape tribe can thrive
to vegetable food causes a great desire for salt.
fact that certain tribes of negroes who cannot obtain salt, add to their
potash.
contain about 21 per cent.
5 per cent.
sodium chloride.
those who take flesh food.
have a strong objection to added salt, and have abstained from it for
 Some find that it predisposes to colds, causes skin irritation and
 At many vegetarian restaurants the food is exceedingly
except with displeasure.
accustomed to flesh foods, and it is their taste which has to be catered
 Flesh, and particularly blood, which of course, is in flesh, contains
in the habit of using the salt cellar.
stimulating diet, and have not a proper appreciation of the mildly
 Only those who have, for a time,
how pleasant vegetables can be; even those vegetables which before were
distinct flavours.
variety in such foods than was previously imagined.
that salt and other condiments are necessary to make food palatable and to
 We, on the contrary, say that
eaten without them, it is a sign of disorganisation of the digestive
natural and healthy appetite.
more work for the kidneys in separating it from the blood prior to its
 Even should it be admitted, that certain vegetables contain too
sufficient; there is no excuse for the general use of it, and in such a
 It is thought that some cases of inflammation of
patients suffering from the disease very soon improve, on being placed on
and potassium salts.
(oedema), to which such invalids are subject, to disappear and reappear at
 The
continuation of several days, produced oedema.
of nearly two pounds of potatoes, with flesh, but without added salt, the
 As potatoes
showing contrary to expectations, that such quantity as they contained had
 Salt and other chlorides
diseases of the kidneys, but also of the liver and heart.
diseases the excess of salt is retained in the tissues, it causes a flow
dropsy.
is probably due to its relative poverty in sodium and potassium chlorides.
Even in the case of three healthy men, by an abrupt change from a diet
body-weight by as much as two kilos.
 6 oz.
of an excess of water from their connective tissues.
diminishes the solvent action of water on uric acid and the urates; but
action.
diseased persons, such cases are instructive; it is only reasonable to
natural to the food, is a source of irritation in the body, even of the

Summary.
upon the nature of the food.
than sumptuous fare with bad digestion.
relationship between simplicity and health.
the tom-tom or the clatter of wooden instruments: what a contrast this is
 Uncivilised man has little enjoyment
providing him with food, clothing or other physical gratification.
enormous advance has taken place.
mind can appreciate a wide range and delicacy of colour.
on the crab-apple and the wild strawberry.
produced the large-grained nutritious wheat.
been greatly improved by long continued cultivation.
sub-tropical climates, where wild fruits are more plentiful, high
 In sparsely
and other animals were plentiful, and edible fruits few, flesh could be
for the cultivation of fruits, cereals, and other foods scarcely existed.
Flesh almost requires to be cooked to be palatable, certainly this much
 The eating of flesh tends to produce a distaste for
 In process of time, not only
seasoning, or mixed with the flesh, blood or viscera of the animals
 Next, food was manufactured to produce a still greater variety, to
digestibility or nutritiveness.
agreeable, rarely has he been intentionally guided by scientific
 Only of late years can it be
cookery books innumerable have abounded.
have enormously increased, some even seem to be new.
disturbances, dental caries, appendicitis, gout, rheumatism, diabetes,
are due, in a great measure, to abuse of food.
original of scientific men, Professor Elie Metchnikoff, in his remarkable
complexity of preparation says that it "militates against physiological
.
.
Most of the complicated dishes provided in the homes, hotels and
in a harmful way.
to go back to the simpler dishes of our ancestors.
hundred years, and physiologists, including Metchnikoff, see no inherent
 Most men are
what an immense gain it would be.
useful member of the community, from about 25 to 60 or perhaps to 70; he

be using and adding to the accumulated experience and knowledge of the

Some, perceiving the mischief wrought by luxurious habits, urge us to go
 This is ambiguous.
animals as being in a state of nature, conveys the distinct idea of their
any way, by man.
a meaning varying with the views of each speaker.
meaning, it must surely be the giving way to the animal impulses and
that the arts and sciences have done for man, all that he has acquired
hundreds of thousands of years, and to fall back to the lowest
clothing and shelter, to the time when man was a mere animal.
man is not only an animal, but an intellectual and spiritual being, and it
 Our
has lagged far behind.
character, stimulates the lower nature of man, his selfish propensities;
 In the treatment of
rare upon the usual abundant flesh dietary.
food, particularly farinaceous, can a permanent cure be assured.
editor of the Clarion, Mr.
 Blatchford, or "Nunquam," has lately adopted
 He remarks with surprise, that although he has been a
tobacco a week, often two ounces in a day, he has found his passion for
 He has had to get milder tobacco, and is now not
 He says "it does not taste the same; I am not
" He finds, with regard to wine, that he now cannot
" He writes: "These things have come upon
 I begin to see that the great cure for the evil of
"
We have given reasons of a scientific character, for abstaining from flesh
 Everything
person.
box-shaped buildings, five or six storeys high, about ten millions of
 They are treated as if they were bales of
 Bullocks are struck on the head
 They are
some machinery, which moves them along, their heads hanging downwards.
Regardless of their agony, men run after them to cut their throats,
 Much of the warm
consequence, if but a small fraction of a minute is economised.
time, whether the animal has bled long enough or not, it reaches the
where it is disembowelled.
place is filthy, there is no proper lavatory accommodation, everything
 Even if the windows were kept clean,
 Consequently a
 Tuberculosis is

class.

religion; who call ourselves the followers of the gentle Jesus, the Prince
science.
gratification.
rights.
gentle Buddha hold life sacred.
 H.
amongst the simple-minded Burmese, says that though there is now no law
cattle or sell beef.
Buddhistic teaching, and this is a commandment wonderfully well kept.
believes that all that is beautiful in life is founded on compassion and

rats with a terrier, or go ferreting? Not so.
 That
one can doubt.
fellow-men.

fellow-men, but also to the lower animals, we retard our progress towards
expression and we are less responsive to spiritual influences.

 I.

I.

[Footnote: 'Fortnightly Review,' 1865, vol.
 p.
]
WE cannot think of space as finite, for wherever in imagination we
beyond it.
more or less adequate idea of the infinity of space.
compelled to think of space as unbounded, there is no mental necessity
so or not must be decided by experiment and observation.
not entirely void, the starry heavens declare; but the question still
regions which surround them, and across which their light is
question, founded on the Newtonian theory, would have been, 'No, for
' The reply of
  It has the
particles; but, in support of the conclusion that the celestial spaces
those which can be adduced of the existence of an atmosphere round the
  Men's minds, indeed, rose to a conception of the celestial and
one.
ascended to the phenomena of light, as displayed in the _aether_; which

The notion of this medium must not be considered as a vague or
  Of its reality
and moon.

properties are those of a solid rather than of a gas.
jelly rather than air.
aether, but it is that forced upon us by a more complete knowledge of
  A body thus constituted may have its boundaries; but,
events extend as far as the most distant visible stars.
the vehicle of their light, and without it they could not be seen.
This all-pervading substance takes up their molecular tremors, and
  It
distant, which translates itself in human consciousness into the

If the aether have a boundary, masses of ponderable matter might be
  Beyond
combustion might be carried on; fuel might consume unseen, and metals
  A body, moreover, once heated there,
continue for ever molten.
abstraction of molecular motion by the aether, where this medium is
  A sentient being on approaching a
temperature.
radiation would not exist, and actual contact would first reveal the

Imagine a paddle-wheel placed in water and caused to rotate.
as a centre, waves would issue in all directions, and a wader as he
stronger waves.
the wader is exactly analogous to the augmentation of light when we
  In the one case, however, the coarse
finer optic nerve.
distance would then cease, and, as far as the sense of touch is
of the wheel by the blow of the paddles.
from the paddles to the water is mechanically similar to the
and the propagation of waves through the liquid is mechanically

As far as our knowledge of space extends, we are to conceive it as the
enormous distances apart, the ponderous nuclei of the stars.
Associated with the star that most concerns us we have a group of dark
rotating on its own axis; and, finally, associated with some of these
  Whether the
matter of pure conjecture, which may or may not enter into our
  But probably every thoughtful person
something besides our system on which they shine.

bodies contained in it, we pass to the enquiry whether things were so
  Was space furnished at once, by the fiat of
of science this view is fading more and more.
discern the nebulae from which they have been condensed.
going so far back as the nebulae, the man of science can prove that
been evolved.

matter in the universe attracts every other particle with a force
  Thus the
moon are kept in company, the force which holds every respective pair
parts.
and is warmed by the shock; under its operation meteors plunge into
  Showers of such meteors
  Acted on by this force, the
finally combine with, the sun.
collision.
calculated its amount.
of more than 5,000 worlds of solid coal, all this heat being generated
  In the attraction of gravity, therefore,
powerful than could be derived from any terrestrial combustion.
were the matter of the universe thrown in cold detached fragments into
the collision of the fragments would in the end produce the fires of

The action of gravity upon matter originally cold may, in fact, be the
other powers as are generated by light and heat.
enquire what is the light and what is the heat thus produced?  This
  Both light and
  Two planets clash and come to rest; their
part continued as a motion of their ultimate particles.
latter motion, taken up by the aether, and propagated through it with
and heat of suns and stars.
inconceivable rapidity--billions of times in a second--but this power
atoms themselves.
by one force, they are kept asunder by another, their position at any
  The
same time their approach and their retreat, but which tolerate the
  The molecular vibration once set up is

We on the earth's surface live night and day in the midst of aethereal
  The medium is never still.
be thick enough to shut out the light of the stars; but this canopy is
aether.
forth.
the earth upon a clear night; it is the return of thermal motion from
from falling so low.
therefore add the conception of its being in a state of incessant

The sources of this vibration are the ponderable masses of the
  Let us take a sample of these and examine it in detail.
When we look to our planet, we find it to be an aggregate of solids,
  Subjected to a sufficiently low temperature, the
  When we look at any one
parts.
by the union, in definite proportions, of two gases, oxygen and
  We know how to bring these constituents together, so as to
its two constituents.
the earth.
of carbon, oxygen, and calcium.
union of which, in definite proportions, has resulted in the formation
  The flints within the chalk we know to be a compound of
most part, formed by the union of silicium, oxygen, and the well-known
  By far the greater portion of the earth's
few lines.

attraction which every particle of matter, however small, exerts on
  With gravity there is no selection; no
objects of attraction; the attraction of gravitation is proportional
quality.
are otherwise arranged.
attraction is exercised, and also atoms between which a weak
  One atom can jostle another out of its place,
  But, though the amount
attraction of the same mechanical quality, if I may use the term, as
  Its intensity might be measured in the same
time.
expressed by the number 32; because, when acting freely on a body for
feet a second.
hydrogen might be measured by the velocity imparted to the atoms in
  Of course such a unit of time as a second is
cross the minute spaces which separate them amounting only to an

It has been stated that when a body falls to the earth it is warmed by
  Here, to use the terminology of Mayer, we have a
  Let us suffer the
atoms, and for the attraction of gravity let us substitute that of

and from the amount of heat generated we can infer the intensity of
  Measured by ordinary mechanical standards, this is
  Mix eight pounds of oxygen with one of hydrogen, and pass a
rushing over the little distances which separate them.
of 47,000 pounds to an elevation of 1,000 feet above the earth's
earth will not exceed that of the eight pounds of oxygen atoms, as

It is sometimes stated that gravity is distinguished from all other
force.
light, and these again into magnetism and electricity: but gravity
circumstances, and not capable of disappearing to give place to
  The statement arises from vagueness of thought.
meant that a particle of matter can never be deprived of its weight,
of natural forces was never intended, in the minds of those who
occurs in any case whatever.
gravity and chemical affinity stand on precisely the same footing.
The attraction in the one case is as indestructible as in the other.
Nobody affirms that when a stone rests upon the surface of the earth,
means to affirm that the mutual attraction of oxygen for hydrogen
  What is meant,
acting through a certain space, imparts a motion of translation of the
  This motion is not heat, nor is the force
  But when the atoms strike and recoil, the
is heat.
of the original attraction, is in part carried on by that attraction.
The atoms recoil, in virtue of the elastic force which opposes actual
  The original
once more together.
their motion is imparted to the surrounding aether; or, in other

In this sense, and in this sense only, is chemical affinity converted
  There is, first of all, the attraction between the atoms;
  Across this space the
  They collide, they recoil, they oscillate.
There is here a change in the form of the motion, but there is no real
  It is so with the attraction of gravity.
gravity space must also intervene between the attracting bodies.
they strike together motion is apparently destroyed, but in reality
  Their atoms are suddenly urged together by
thus is set up the molecular oscillation which, when communicated to

It was formerly universally supposed that by the collision of
  Men saw, for example, that when
together, the motion possessed by the masses, prior to impact, was
  They believed in an absolute destruction of
  Until recent times, indeed, no difficulty was
and its destruction refuse to be united in most philosophic minds.
the collision of elastic bodies, on the contrary, it was observed that
by the resiliency of the masses, the more perfect the elasticity the
  This led to the idea of
the whole of the motion which they possessed before impact--and this
destruction of force which was supposed to occur when unelastic bodies

We now know that the principle of conservation holds equally good with
  Perfectly elastic bodies would develop
  They would retain their motion afterwards,
motion is wholly or partly destroyed, that heat is generated.
always occurs in unelastic collision, the heat developed being the
  This heat
masses, exists among their atoms; by the recoil and oscillation of

But ambiguity in the use of the term 'force' makes itself more and
  We have called the attraction of gravity a
  A body resting on a shelf is
shelf, it falls towards the earth.
that molecular attraction which we called chemical affinity.
however, we spoke of the conservation of force, in the case of elastic
indicated, might be exerted upon inert matter, but we meant force
masses.

work that it can perform.
a weight.
his hand, to an elevation say of sixteen feet, performs a certain
  If he
work; if to a height of forty-eight feet, he does three times the

being equal, he does twice the work; if three, four, or five pounds,
  In fact, it is plain
the height to which it is raised.
these two factors.

the force of gravity, without being actually carried up.
for example, wished to land a brick at an elevation of sixteen feet
bricklayer.
the brick sufficient to raise it to the required height; the work
slowly carried up the brick.
this case, is well known.
brick must quit the man's hand with a velocity of thirty-two feet a
  It is needless to say, that a body starting with any
ever with the same velocity.
body is thrown upwards, it moves in opposition to gravity, which
elevation of sixteen feet.
would return to the hodman with an accelerated motion, and reach his

An important relation between velocity and work is here to be pointed
  Supposing the hodman competent to impart to the brick, at
velocity, would the amount of work performed be twice what it was in
body starting with twice the velocity of another, will rise to four
  In like manner, a three-fold velocity will give a
elevation, and so on.
to the initial velocity, but to the square of the velocity.
before, the work is also proportional to the weight elevated.
the work which any moving mass whatever is competent to perform, in
proportional to its weight and the square of its velocity.
then, we have a second measure of work, in which we simply translate

In mechanics, the product of the mass of a moving body into the square
force.
' If, for
the velocity imparted to a second ball, the former will rise to four
  If directed against a
  Hence the
  Having
viva_ of moving masses, we are prepared for the announcement that the
proportional to the _vis viva_ annihilated.
the square of the velocity.
cannon-balls of equal weight, if one strike a target with twice the
three times the velocity, it will generate nine times the heat, and so

Mr.
feet, or 772 pounds falling through one foot, will generate by its
of water one degree Fahrenheit in temperature.
constitute the mechanical equivalent of heat.
from a height of 772 feet, has, upon striking the earth, a velocity of
any other means, the quantity of heat generated by the stoppage of its
  Six times that velocity, or 1,338
gun.
second, would, by collision, generate an amount of heat competent to
 If
the ball itself, its temperature would be raised about 360 degrees
about ten degrees in the case of iron.
heat generated is usually concentrated upon the front of the bolt, and
  By this concentration the
metal to incandescence, a flash of light often accompanying collision

Let us now fix our attention for a moment on the gunpowder which urges
  This is composed of combustible matter, which if
  It will
  The
in the open air, by an amount equivalent to the _vis viva_ of the ball;
the target.
connected.

asserts, that the quantity of force in the universe is as unalterable
and to annihilate it.
assertion?  It would be manifestly inapplicable to the force of
the square of the distance; and to affirm the constancy of a varying
  Yet, when the question is properly

elementary exposition of this law.
applications to produce momentous changes in human thought, it is not

For the sake of simplicity we will consider a particle of matter,
particle, D, placed at a distance from F.
two particles attract each other according to the Newtonian law.
certain distance, the attraction is of a certain definite amount,
  At half this
the distance, nine times; at one-fourth of the distance, sixteen
  In every case, the attraction might be measured by
sufficient to prevent D from moving towards F.
nothing whatever to do with motion; we deal with statics, not with
  We simply take into account the _distance_ of D from F, and

It is customary in mechanics to represent the magnitude of a force by
represented by a line of double length, and so on.
particle D at a distance from F, we can, in imagination, draw a
line, which shall represent the amount of the attraction exerted on D.
If D be at a very great distance from F, the attraction will be very
  If the distance
  Let us
to be erected, proportional in length to the attraction exerted at
gradually increasing length, as D approaches F.
all these perpendiculars, we obtain a curve, and between this curve
the perpendiculars placed side by side.
series of perpendiculars representing an attraction, or tension, as it
the tensions exerted upon the particle D, during its passage from its

Up to the present point we have been dealing with tensions, not with
  Thus far _vis viva_ has been entirely foreign to our
  Let us now suppose D placed at a
gravity would be infinitely small, and the perpendicular representing
  In this position the sum of the
  Let D now
upon it.
  In

is moving.
tensions; beyond that point the tensions have been all consumed, but
  After D
disappears, but not without having added, during the infinitely small
possessed by D.
of the tensions remaining, but the greater is the _vis viva_; the
tensions, and the less is the living force.
conservation affirms _not_ the constancy of the value of the tensions of
the absolute constancy of the value of both taken together.
beginning the _vis viva_ was zero, and the tension area was a maximum;

consists in part of _vis viva_, and in part of tensions.

the particles in contact, the sum of the tensions between D and F
  If, in obedience to the
farther D retreated from F the greater would be its _vis viva_, and the

the conservation of force affirms that the mechanical value of the
it, is a constant quantity.
kinds of property which are mutually convertible.
either carries with it the enhancement of the other, the total value

The considerations here applied to gravity apply equally to chemical
  In a mixture of oxygen and hydrogen the atoms exist apart,
together across that space that separates them.
exists, and as long as the atoms have not begun to move towards each
  During their motion towards
_vis viva_.
form.
  It _was_ molecular

It is possible to reverse these processes, to unlock the combined
  But, to accomplish

  By the solar waves,
plants.
they re-endow the atoms of oxygen and hydrogen with tension.
atoms are thus enabled to recombine, and when they do so they restore
  The same
acid, which is exhaled from our lungs, produced by our fires, and
  In the leaves
and sacrifice themselves in the act; but when the plants are burnt,

This, then, is the rhythmic play of Nature as regards her forces.
Throughout all her regions she oscillates from tension to _vis viva_,
  We have the same play in the planetary
  The earth's orbit is an ellipse, one of the foci of which is
  Imagine the earth at the most distant part of
  Her motion, and consequently her _vis viva_, is then a
  The planet rounds the curve, and begins its approach to the
  In front it has a store of tensions, which are gradually
  When
maximum.
  The

at the expense of the complementary force on the opposite side of the
  Thus beats the heart of the universe, but without increase or

I have thus far tried to steer clear amid confusion, by fixing the
  But good names
  We
things.
force of heat, the force of light, the force of magnetism, or the
less loosely by writers on physics.
by the introduction of the term 'energy,' which embraces both _tension_
  Energy is possessed by bodies already in motion; it is
  It is
  On the other hand, energy is possible to bodies not
power of motion which would realise itself if all hindrances were
  Looking, for example, at gravity; a body on the earth's
possesses no energy.
  But
motion, though it may not have exercised it.
such a body, and we agree to call this potential energy.
of our old tensions.
energy, instead of the conservation of force; and say that the sum of
constant quantity.

up potential energy.
energy is consumed, its potential energy being then a maximum.
it returns, there is a reconversion of the potential into the actual.
A pendulum at the limit of its swing possesses potential energy; at
  A patch of snow
shooting down as an avalanche, it possesses dynamic energy.
pine-trees growing on the Alps have potential energy; but rushing down
  The same
  As long as the rocks which
which is converted into actual when the frost ruptures their cohesion
  The stone avalanches of
  The hammer
possesses potential energy; when it falls, the energy becomes dynamic;
dynamic in the vibrations of the bell.
molecular oscillations of a heated body.
its neighbour, and recoils.
being attained, the motion of the atom in that direction is checked,
  It is then drawn
converting its potential into dynamic energy.
direction is also finally checked, and again, for an instant, its
  It once more retreats, converting, by
a maximum, after which it is again changed into potential energy.
Thus, what is true of the earth, as she swings to and fro in her
  We

When a body is heated, a change of molecular arrangement always
  Hence, a portion

article, now that our knowledge is more extensive, we see the
  When, for example, two bodies clash,
developed at the moment of collision, is not the exact equivalent of
  The true equivalent is this
placing of greater distances between them.
energy is afterwards, on the cooling of the body, converted into heat.

attractions exist separately, they form a store of potential energy.
Thus our woods, forests, and coal-fields on the one hand, and our
this kind--vast, but far from infinite.
coal-fields, metallic bodies more or less sparsely distributed through
 These bodies can be oxydised; and hence they are,
  But the attractions of the great
further energy can possibly be obtained.
constituents of our rocks clashed together and produced the motion of
stellar space.
  In
the chalk and limestone hills which are now cold; and from this
  So it
 They
their potential energy into dynamic, and yielded it as radiant heat to
  For him a
life and wants of an individual, but exceedingly minute in comparison

To sum up.
consists of attractions, repulsions, and motions.
and repulsions be so circumstanced as to be able to produce motion,
  As stated a
distance from the earth's surface, is a source of working-power;
perform work.
power or energy, because it can fall no farther.
ceased to be a source of _energy_, the attraction of gravity still acts

The same remarks apply to attracting atoms and molecules.
distance separates them, they can move across it in obedience to the
caused to perform mechanical work.
hydrogen unite with one of oxygen, to form water, the atoms are first
their resiliency, they recoil and quiver.
give the name of heat.
redistribution of the motion produced by the chemical affinity; and
converted into heat.
destroyed, or converted into anything else.
mutually clasped to form a molecule of water, are held together by the
  That which
which the distance between the atoms has been diminished.

insisted on, may, in this sense, be said to be convertible into heat;
as it is sometimes stated to be, than is chemical affinity.
exertion of a certain pull through a certain space, a body is caused
  Heat is
said to be converted into heat.
produces the motion annihilated or changed into anything else.
mutual attraction of the earth and weight exists when they are in
to employ itself in the production of motion does not exist.

eye.
of gravity.
earth, being broken up into molecular tremors, to which we give the

And when we reverse the process, and employ those tremors of heat to
fluid in the steam-engine--a certain definite portion of the molecular
  In this sense, and in this sense only, can the
potential energy of gravity.
created no new attraction; but the old attraction has conferred upon
starting-point of the falling weight and the earth.

tensions being 'consumed' and 'generated,' they do not mean thereby
existence, but that, in the one case, the power of the attraction to
between the attracting bodies, while, in the other case, the power of

molecules.

nothing; and the law of conservation makes no statement regarding that
  It takes the facts of attraction as they stand, and affirms
  That power may exist in the form
through_.
energy, the constancy of the sum of both being affirmed by the law of
  The convertibility of natural forces consists solely in
dynamic energy.
scientific meaning.

conserved by the doctrine of conservation.
will tend to remove them.


 RADIATION.

University of Cambridge, May 16, 1865.


  Visible and Invisible Radiation.

of the human body, which translate, or enable the mind to translate,

Different nerves are suited to the perception of different
  We do not see with the ear, nor hear with the eye, nor
  Out of
nerves, selects and responds to those for the perception of which it

The optic nerve passes from the brain to the back of the eyeball and
which the images of external objects are projected by the optical
  This nerve is limited to the apprehension of the
sensibility to certain impressions of this class, it is singularly

Nor does the optic nerve embrace the entire range even of radiation.
Some rays, when they reach it, are incompetent to evoke its power,
the eye.
fail to excite vision, we give the name of invisible or obscure rays.
All non-luminous bodies emit such rays.
absolutely cold, and every body not absolutely cold emits rays of
  But to render radiant heat fit to affect the optic nerve a
  A cool poker thrust into a fire
that of the surrounding coals, it glows like them.
a current of electricity, of gradually increasing strength, be sent
becomes sensibly warm to the touch; for a time its heat augments,
metal with impunity; and at a certain definite temperature it emits a
  As the current augments in power the light augments
 The

By means of a prism Sir Isaac Newton unravelled the texture of solar
luminous changes of our platinum wire.
all its rays (and they are infinite in variety) are bent or refracted
refracted by the prism, we are by it enabled to separate one class of
  By such prismatic analysis Dr.
that when the platinum wire first begins to glow, the light emitted is
  As the glow augments the red becomes more brilliant,
 Augmenting
after the yellow, green rays are emitted; and after the green come, in
  To display all these
impression of whiteness being in fact produced by the simultaneous

In the experiment just described we began with a platinum wire at an
  At the
the wire, it emitted invisible rays.
of the current had commenced, and even for a time after the wire had

visible ones make their appearance?  It will be proved in the sequel
emitted continues to be emitted when the temperature is increased, and
its maximum brilliancy, consists of a mixture of visible and invisible
  If, instead of the platinum wire, the earth itself were raised
continue to be emitted.
to pass through all the stages of non-luminous radiation, and the
  There can
kind to those which the dark earth pours nightly into space.
the various kind of obscure rays emitted by all the planets of our

The great pioneer in this domain of science was Sir William Herschel.
Causing a beam of solar light to pass through a prism, he resolved it
the solar spectrum.
he determined their heating power, and found it to augment from the
spectrum.
  Pushing his thermometers into
disappeared, the radiant heat falling on the instruments was more
  In fact, Sir
philosophers since his time, that, besides its luminous rays, the sun
the luminous ones, but entirely unsuited to the purposes of vision.

the sun's radiation is not limited by that of the eye.
statement applies to the more refrangible end.
extension of the spectrum into the invisible region beyond the violet;
interest conferred upon it by the admirable researches of Professor
  The complete spectrum of the sun consists, therefore, of
but unsuited to the purposes of vision; secondly, of luminous rays
blue, indigo, violet; thirdly, of ultra-violet rays which, like the
the ultra-red rays, possess a very feeble heating power.
consequence, however, of their chemical energy these ultra-violet rays

********************
2.
  The Aether.

emitting in succession all the colours of the spectrum, we are simply
  We
but the mind irresistibly infers that the appearance of the colours
  What is
wire radiate at all?  We must now look from the wire, as a whole, to
  Could we see those atoms, even before the
state of vibration.
as the wire then possesses.
precision, and it has been placed beyond the pale of doubt by the
 Joule.
'is a very brisk agitation of the insensible parts of the object,
hot: so what in our sensations is _heat_ in the object is nothing but
' When the electric current, still feeble, begins to pass
existing, by causing the atoms to swing through wider ranges.
Technically speaking, the _amplitudes_ of the oscillations are
  The current does this, however, without altering the
executed.
generates new and more rapid ones, and when a certain definite
  The colour first
which the eye is able to take cognisance.
of the electric current more rapid vibrations are introduced, and
  A quicker rate of vibration produces yellow, a
through blue, indigo, and violet, to the extreme ultra-violet rays.

concurrent with the visual changes taking place in the eye.
connects the wire with this organ? By what means does it send such
as defined by Locke, 'a very brisk agitation of the insensible parts
body the agitation may communicate itself to the adjacent nerves, and
  But the optic nerve does
By what agency are the vibrations of the wire transmitted to the eye?
The answer to this question involves one of the most important
conception of a medium filling space and fitted mechanically for the
the transmission of sound.
aether_.
this aether a wave, which speeds through it at the rate of 186,000

The aether suffers no rupture of continuity at the surface of the eye,
hence the waves generated by the glowing platinum can cross these

sound-waves through thick felt whose interstices are occupied by air.
Thus the sensation of light reduces itself to the acceptance of
  Up to this point we deal with pure mechanics; but the
consciousness eludes mechanical science.
Cam generates systems of waves, which, speeding from the centre of
vibrating atoms generate in the surrounding aether undulations, which
  The motion thus imparted is
where, by a process which the science of mechanics does not even tend
conscious impression of light.

motion.
absence of light-waves we have heat-waves always speeding through it.
In the spaces of the universe both classes of undulations incessantly
  Here the waves issuing from uncounted centres cross,
ultimate extinction.
wave-motions produced by all other stars.
caused by those distant orbs collectively in the aether, that
' As the air of a
transmitting each vibration of every pipe and string, so does the
and heat.
endowed with an individuality as indestructible as if it alone had

All vagueness with regard to the use of the terms 'radiation' and
  Radiation is the communication of
by radiation, as for example the grass of a meadow on a starlight
portion of their motion, by imparting it to the medium in which they
  On the other hand, the waves of aether may so strike against
motion to the latter; and in this transfer of the motion from the
  All
motion; and it is purely as the recipients or the donors of this
cold.


  The Atomic Theory in reference to the Aether.


elementary forms to which they give this name.
endowed with powers of mutual attraction, and under suitable
  Thus oxygen and
made to _combine_ so as to form molecules, each consisting of two atoms
  In this condition they constitute
  So also chlorine and sodium are elements, the former a pungent
of sodium or common salt.
combines with hydrogen, in the proportion of one atom of the former to
  Picturing in imagination the
compound bodies must be pictured as groups of such spheres.
the atomic theory as Dalton conceived it.
foundation in fact, and if the theory of an aether pervading space,
is surely of interest to examine whether the vibrations of elementary
radiation and absorption, or, in other words, whether as regards the
from it, the deportment of the uncombined atoms will be different from

********************
4.

We have now to submit these considerations to the only test by which
  An experiment is well
amiss, we ought to purify the question from all adjuncts which do not
  Matter has been shown to be composed of
are produced.
elementary and compound bodies can unite in another and less intimate
  Gases and vapours aggregate to liquids and solids, without any
  We do not yet know how the
to cohesion; and, as our object now is to examine the influence of
liberating the atoms and molecules entirely from the bonds of

Let us endeavour to obtain a perfectly clear mental image of the
  Limiting in the first place our enquiries to
issuing from a radiant source and passing through a gas; some of them
the latter; others gliding round the molecules, or passing through the
  The problem before
to stop the waves of heat; and if so, whether different molecules

In examining the problem let us fall back upon an actual piece of
against the back of which a steady sheet of flame is permitted to
  On emerging from the copper, the waves, in the first instance,
cylinder, three feet long and three inches wide.
cylinder are stopped by two plates of rock-salt, a solid substance
calorific waves.
falls upon the anterior face of a thermo-electric pile, [Footnote: In
construction of the thermo-electric pile is fully explained.
instantly converts the heat into an electric current.
conducted round a magnetic needle deflects it, and the magnitude of
  This
use in these enquiries, but we shall use it in a somewhat novel way.
As long as the two opposite faces of the thermo-electric pile are kept
current generated.
temperature between the two opposite faces of the pile.
after the anterior face has received the heat from our radiating
permitted to radiate against the posterior face, this latter radiation
  When the neutralisation is
deflected, but points to the zero of the graduated circle over which

And now let us suppose the glass tube, through which the waves from
air-pump, the two sources of heat acting at the same time on the two
  When by means of an adjusting screen,
needle points to zero.
exhausted tube; if its molecules possess any power of intercepting the
destroyed, the compensating source will triumph, and a deflection of
  From the
the relative amounts of wave-motion which their molecules intercept.

examined, a small portion only of each being admitted into the glass
  The quantity admitted in each case was just sufficient to
other words, the gases were examined at a pressure of one-thirtieth of
  The numbers in the table express the relative amounts
intercepted by air being taken as unity.


Name of gas      Relative absorption
Air                        1
Oxygen                     1
Nitrogen                   1
Hydrogen                   1
Carbonic oxide           750
Carbonic acid            972
Hydrochloric acid.







say, all waves within the limits of the visible spectrum pass through
from our heated plate of copper, enormous differences of absorptive
  These differences illustrate in the most
  Thus the
atmospheric air, prove to be practical vacua to the rays of heat; for
which any one of them intercepts, perfectly transparent ammonia
acid gas absorbs 6,480 units.
intercepted?  It is applied to the heating of the absorbing gas.
Through air, oxygen, hydrogen, and nitrogen, the waves of aether pass
temperature by the most powerful calorific rays.
nitrous oxide in the foregoing table is worthy of particular notice.
In this gas we have the same atoms in a state of chemical union, that
is 1,800 times that of air.


  Formation of Invisible Foci.

directed attention to elementary bodies in other states of
  Some of Melloni's results now attained a new
  This celebrated experimenter had found crystals of
lamp-black, and black glass, (which owes its blackness to the element
low refrangibility.
deportment of the simple gases, suggested further enquiry.
dissolved in bisulphide of carbon was found almost perfectly
  The dense and deeply-coloured element bromine was
brilliant flames, while it transmitted the invisible calorific rays
  Iodine, the companion element of bromine, was
substance in its usual solid condition.
in bisulphide of carbon.
liquid and the iodine; it is simply a case of solution, in which the
  When
sufficiently opaque to cut off the light of the midday sun, was almost
 [Footnote:
opaque to light, and highly transparent to obscure heat, by fusing
]
By prismatic analysis Sir William Herschel separated the luminous from
obscure rays visible by concentration.
portion of his spectrum he brought, by a converging lens, the
light.
beam, or failing it, the beam of the electric lamp, which renders
possibly be obtained by the method of Sir William Herschel.
form his spectrum he was obliged to operate upon solar light which had
of the obscure heat being limited by this circumstance.
opaque solution we may employ the entire surface of the largest lens,
intercept the former by the iodine, and do what we please with the
  Experiments of this character, not only with the iodine
publicly performed at the Royal Institution in the early part of 1862,
such as had never been witnessed previously.

concentrate the rays.
luminous, is in a high degree opaque to the invisible, heat-rays of
intercepted by the glass.
rock-salt lenses instead of glass ones, or to abandon the use of
  Both
invisible foci have been thereby rendered more intense.
operating remains however the same, in principle, as that made known
  It was then found that an instant's exposure of the face of
needles of a coarse galvanometer violently aside.
that on substituting for the face of the thermo-electric pile a
fire.


  Visible and Invisible Rays of the Electric Light.

electric light bear to the luminous ones.
iodine enables us to do with an extremely close approximation to the

The pure bisulphide of carbon, which is the solvent of the iodine, is
transparent to the dark, rays of the electric lamp.
total radiation of the lamp to pass through the transparent
are transmitted.
the total radiation, and deduct from it the purely obscure, we obtain
  Experiments, performed in
were converged to a focus of dazzling brilliancy, its heat would only
rays.

spectrum, Sir William Herschel determined the heating power of each,
  Then drawing a
various points, perpendiculars to represent the calorific intensity
  Uniting the ends of all his perpendiculars,
heat was distributed in the solar spectrum.
Freiburg, with improved instruments, afterwards made similar

electric light; and for this purpose we shall employ a particular form
  Its face is a
narrow as desired.
tenth, the hundredth, or even the thousandth of an inch in breadth.
means of an endless screw, this linear thermo-electric pile may be
amount of heat falling upon the pile at every point of its march,

When this instrument is brought up to the violet end of the spectrum
  As the
manifests itself, augmenting as we approach the red.
colours of the visible spectrum the red possesses the highest heating
  On pushing the pile into the dark region beyond the red, the
intensity, until at some distance beyond the red it attains a maximum.
Moving the pile still forward, the thermal power falls, somewhat more
  It then gradually shades away, but, for a
spectrum, signs of heat may be detected.

proportional in length to the thermal intensity at the respective
which exhibits the distribution of heat in the spectrum of the
  In the region of dark rays, beyond the red, the curve
heat, which dwarfs the portion of the diagram C D E, representing the
  Indeed the idea forced upon the mind by this
the heat-rays represented by the area A B C D, thrown in as it were by

Figure 1.

heat in the solar spectrum is not by any means so striking as that
the earth the solar rays have to traverse our atmosphere.
aqueous vapour there diffused, the summit of the peak representing the
  A similar lowering of the
light are permitted to pass through a film of water, which acts upon

********************
7.

The sun's invisible rays far transcend the visible ones in heating
siege of Syracuse had any foundation in fact, the dark solar rays
  On a
the electric light, all that Archimedes is said to have performed with
  Placing behind the electric light a small
their point of convergence being rendered clearly visible by the dust
  Placing between the luminous focus and
entirely cut away; but the intolerable heat experienced when the band
calorific rays pass unimpeded through the opaque solution.

the focus of invisible rays; the air at the focus remaining at the
heat-rays.
unaffected by the heat of the focus: there would be no expansion, and
  The aether at the focus, and
  A block
smoke rise swiftly upwards, showing the manner in which the air itself
  At the
are speedily burnt up: lead, tin, and zinc are fused: and disks of
  It might be supposed
but they do show a preference, and to obtain rapid combustion, the
  When metals are to
to diminish their reflective power.
into the focus of invisible rays, is instantly caused to blaze, and
  Magnesium wire flattened, or
  Pieces of
when the invisible focus falls upon them; the dark rays after having
ignite the charcoal, and thus initiate the attack of the oxygen.
instead of being plunged in oxygen, the charcoal be suspended in

********************
8.

[Footnote: I borrow this term from Professor Challis, 'Philosophical
 xii.
 521]
Eminent experimenters were long occupied in demonstrating the
means of offering a new and striking proof of this identity.
concave mirror produces, beyond the object which it reflects, an
  Withdrawing, for example,
carbon points of the electric light is formed at the focus of the
  When the solution is
disappears from sight; but an invisible thermograph remains, and it is
seeing the picture formed by the calorific rays.
paper, the image chars itself out: falling on black paper, two holes
but falling on a thin plate of carbon in vacuo, or upon a thin sheet
converted into light, and the image stamps itself in vivid
  Results similar to
the invisible rays of the lime-light and of the sun.

excellent researches of Professor Stokes at the opposite end of the
  The above results constitute a kind of complement to his
  Professor Stokes named the phenomena which he has
described I have proposed the term _Calorescence_.
interposition of a proper medium, so lowered the refrangibility of the
  Here, by
ultra-red rays is so exalted as to render them visible.
through a prism at the incandescent image of the carbon points, the

the platinum, shine thus visibly forth; ultra-red rays being converted
ones.
sufficiently high temperature, we might not only obtain from the dark
rays of this image we might obtain a second one, from the dark rays of
being thus extracted from the invisible emission of the primitive
 [Footnote: On investigating the calorescence produced by rays
the case of certain specimens of blue glass, the platinum foil glowed
  The effect was not subjective, and
  Different
radiant heat.
greenish hue: others make it appear a glowing red without any trace of
  The latter are far more diathermic than the former.
carbon when perfectly dissolved and incorporated with a good white
it as an absorbent the phenomena of 'calorescence' may be obtained,
  The black glass
heat, may entirely fail in this object, if the glass in which the
  To render the bulb of a
to be green.

exalted refrangibility.
confirmed the view expressed at page 210 of his work on 'Chemistry,'
]
********************
9.

The layer of iodine used in the foregoing experiments intercepted the
  No trace of light from the electric lamp was
the focus of the mirror employed to concentrate the light.
thought, however, that if the retina itself were brought into the
  The danger of this
  If the dark rays were absorbed in a high
coagulate along the line of the rays.
high absorption took place, the rays might reach the retina with a
  To test the likelihood of these
they showed it to be very improbable that in the brief time requisite
  The eye was
instance, being provided; but the heat, acting upon the parts
  An aperture was therefore
was caused to approach the point of convergence of invisible rays.
focus was attained, first by the pupil and afterwards by the retina.
Removing the eye, but permitting the plate of metal to remain, a sheet
moment before.
  No sensible damage was
produced; the optic nerve was not even conscious of heat.

invisible calorific rays, and the question therefore arises, 'Did the
answer is, that the rays were in part transmitted to the retina, and
  Experiments on the eye of an ox
amounted to 18 per cent.
emission from the electric light amounts to no more than 10 per cent.
of the same total.
converged by our mirror to a focus, there can be no doubt as to the
  Its ruin would be inevitable; and yet
than half of that which the retina, without exciting consciousness,

This subject will repay a moment's further attention.
distance of a foot the visible radiation of the electric light
  At
which reaches the retina, but fails to excite vision, is about 1,500
 [Footnote: It will be
is competent to generate is the true measure of the energy of the
]  But a candle on a clear night can readily be seen at a distance
its light at the distance of a foot.

non-luminous radiation received from the electric light at a foot
20,000,000, or by thirty thousand millions.
millionth part of the invisible radiation from the electric light,
changed in character, be amply sufficient to provoke vision.
could more forcibly illustrate that special relationship supposed by
oscillating periods of luminous bodies.
it were, to the waves with which it is in consonance, while it refuses
periods of recurrence are not in unison with its own.


  Persistence of Rays.

wire was, gradually raised to a state of high incandescence, new rays
increased.
 Draper's experiments, the rise of temperature
intensity of the red.
ray of the spectrum, visible and invisible.
augmentation of intensity in the region beyond the red, but we can
  With this view the following
a small glass globe to protect it from currents of air; through an
afterwards upon a thermo-electric pile.
orifice an opaque solution of iodine, the platinum was gradually
following results:
Appearance of spiral    Energy of obscure radiation
Dark                                1
Dark, but hotter                    3
Dark, but still hotter              5
Dark, but still hotter             10
Feeble red                         19
Dull red                           25
Red                                37
Full red.






from its primitive dark condition to an intense white heat, exalts at
is fully 440 times what it was at the beginning.

is true for each of them singly.
pile in any part of the ultra-red spectrum, it may be proved that a
temperature is augmented.
being raised to whiteness by an electric current, a brilliant spectrum
  A linear thermo-electric pile was placed
current the spiral was reduced to a low temperature.
caused to pass through various degrees of darkness and incandescence,







                           27
Orange                              60
Yellow                              93
White                              122
Here, as in the former case, the dark and bright radiations reached
until at last the energy of the obscure rays of the particular
 To
invisible radiation, but in its most brilliant condition it embraces,

And thus it is with all other kinds of matter, as far as they have
  Coke, whether brought to a white heat by the
with augmented energy, as its light is increased.
lime, bricks, and other substances.
are capable of being heated to incandescence.
phosphorus burning in oxygen.
associated with it a gush of invisible radiant heat, which far
  This condition of things applies to
solid or the molten condition.
luminous fogs formed by the condensation of incandescent vapours.
such cases when the curve representing the radiant energy of the body
the luminous radiation resembling a mere 'spur' at its base.
very brightness of the light of some of the fixed stars we may infer
inseparable associate of their luminous rays.

has attained a certain temperature; or, in other words, when the
 In
without the introduction of periods of vibration, which provoke the
  How are we to figure this?  If permitted to
progeny of the slower?  Is it not really the mutual action of the
upon each other, that causes them to tremble in quicker periods?  If
obtained, we shall have light-giving vibrations associated with it.
matters not whether the large amplitudes be produced by the strokes of
air at some height above a gas-flame; or by the shock of the aether
  The result in all cases
  Thus, the invisible waves of our filtered
among the atoms of the platinum on which they impinge; but, once these
the atoms produces quicker tremors, and the light-giving waves follow

********************
11.

We commenced the demonstrations brought forward in this lecture by
to the vapours of volatile liquids.
gases, vast differences have been proved to exist between various
calorific waves.
free passage, the faintest mixture of other vapours causes a
  Assuming the absorption effected
are the absorptions effected by a series of vapours at a pressure of









acetic ether the most opaque; 1/60th of an atmosphere of the former,
while 1/60th of an atmosphere of the latter produces 612 times the
  Reducing dry air to the pressure
the quantity of wave-motion intercepted by the ether would be many

Any one of these vapours discharged into the free atmosphere, in front
radiation.
air, though their attenuation is known to be almost infinite.
Carrying, for example, a current of dry air over bibulous paper,
times the quantity of heat intercepted by the air which carries it;
perfume yet examined.

odour, in each case, being carried by a current of dry air into the tube



















odour of patchouli diffused in it is 30, at of lavender 60, that of
  It would be idle

********************
12.

We are now fully prepared for a result which, without such
  Water is, to some extent, a
of the ocean, receives from it a continual supply of aqueous vapour.
It would be an error to confound clouds or fog or any visible mist
diffused, even on the clearest days, throughout the atmosphere.
Compared with the great body of the air, the aqueous vapour it
5 out of every 100
  In the
scant and varying constituent any important influence on terrestrial
great body of the air.
England, the atmospheric vapour exerts 100 times the action of the air
  Comparing a
constituents of our atmosphere, I am not prepared to say how many

But it must be borne in mind that these large numbers depend, in part,
seems vast, because that of the air with which it is compared is
  Absolutely considered, however, this substance,
action.
  of the heat radiated from

world.
the motion of heat, and imparting it to the surrounding aether; this
if the waves of aether had nothing but the air to contend with in
  But the aqueous vapour takes up the motion, and
and protecting its surface from the deadly chill which it would
  Various philosophers have speculated on the
  De Saussure, Fourier,
 Pouillet, and Mr.
literature with contributions on this subject, but the considerations
experiments be correct, to be transferred to the aqueous vapour.

unconscious evidence of the influence of this agent.
is dry we are liable to daily extremes of temperature.
places, the sun's heat reaches the earth unimpeded, and renders the
unhindered to space, and renders the minimum low.
difference between the maximum and minimum is greatest where the air
 In the plains of India, the heights of the Himalaya, in
of day forcibly contrasted with the chill of night.
itself, when the sun's rays cease to impinge on the burning soil, the
overhead to check the calorific drain.
might be added to the numbers already known, in which nature tends as
  By nocturnal refrigeration, the
earth; and, as only the superficial portions radiate, the act of
  Now experiment proves
opaque.
cooling, becomes a safeguard to the earth, imparting to its radiation
from escaping into space.

from the sun, the selfsame covering which protects the earth from
  This is partially true,
earth's rays, and it does not at all follow that the substance which
  Through a layer of
are transmitted with comparative freedom; but through a layer half
earth could pass.
comparative freedom through the aqueous vapour of the air: the
invisible heat that endeavours to escape from the earth.
consequence of this differential action upon solar and terrestrial
distance from the sun.


  Liquids and their Vapours in relation to Radiant Heat.

established by direct experiments on it taken from the streets and
of the Isle of Wight, and also by experiments on air in the first
distilled water.
volatile liquids were taken at random and the power of these liquids, at a
determined.
proportional to the quantities of liquid, and the power of the vapours

Commencing with the substance which exerted the least absorptive
order of absorption was observed:
Liquids                             Vapours
Bisulphide of carbon.

Chloroform.

Iodide of methyl.

Iodide of ethyl.

Benzol.

Amylene.

Sulphuric aether.

Acetic aether.

Formic aether.

Alcohol.

Water.

  We
less in a liquid condition; but this change in their state of

upon the individual molecule, which equally asserts its power in the
  We may safely conclude from the above
liquid.
signalising itself above all others by its enormous power of
  And from this fact, even if no direct experiment on the
vapour as our most powerful absorber of radiant heat.
attenuation, however, diminishes its action.
shell of air two inches in thickness surrounding our planet, and
cent.
  And though the quantity of aqueous
sulphuric aether vapour which it can sustain, it is still extremely
vapour within 10 feet of the earth's surface, is under the mark; and
accurately determined, but certainly far beyond what has hitherto been
globe.


  Reciprocity of Radiation and Absorption.

before the mind has been that of a radiant source sending forth
vapour were intercepted by those molecules in various degrees.
cases it was the transference of motion from the aether to the
our thoughts.
to figure these molecules not as absorbers but as radiators, not as
  That is to say,
aether undulations which speed through it with the velocity of light.
Our object now is to enquire whether the act of chemical combination,
not also manifest its power in the phenomena of radiation.
examination of this question it is necessary, in the first place, to
their power of discharging the motion thus imparted to them upon the

A heated copper ball was placed above a ring gas-burner possessing a
with vessels containing the various gases to be examined.
pressure the gases were forced through the orifices of the burner
ascending column.
hot ball, was exposed to the radiation of the warm gas, while the
energy of the radiation.

arrangement which renders a gas a powerful absorber, renders it a
intercept the calorific waves is, in the same degree, competent to
  Thus, while the atoms of elementary gases proved
molecules of compound gases were shown to be capable of powerfully
  By special modes of experiment the
radiative power of every vapour being found proportional to its

The method of experiment here pursued, though not of the simplest
  When air is permitted to rush into
equivalent to the _vis viva_ extinguished.
definition of _vis viva_.
and, if pure, it shows itself incompetent to radiate, even when a
  But if
the warmed air communicates its heat by contact to the vapour, the
them by the atoms of the air.
called Dynamic Radiation, the reciprocity of radiation and absorption
 [Footnote: When heated air imparts its
accompanied by a change of vibrating period.
vapours is rendered possible by this transmutation of vibrations.

and Balfour Stewart, the same reciprocity, as regards solid bodies,
experimental, of Kirchhoff have given this subject a wonderful
  To
vapours, which have been hitherto thought inaccessible to experiments
indissoluble duality of radiation and absorption, the influence of
extraordinary way.


  Influence of Vibrating Period and Molecular Form.
Analysis of the Human Breath.

throughout invisible rays, and found some of these bodies so impervious
as actually as a layer of pitch.
themselves thus opaque to radiant heat perfectly transparent to light.
Now the rays of light differ from those of invisible heat merely in
periods of recurrence are too slow.
transparency of our gases and vapours depends upon the periods of the
  What is the nature of this dependence?
  The atoms
and those waves aether are most copiously absorbed whose periods
pass.
transmitted by a layer of gas, we conclude that the oscillating
those of the invisible, and not with those of the visible spectrum.

of this process.
be obtained.
periods of vibration coincide with the recurrence of the undulations,
as a heavy pendulum is set in motion by well-timed puffs of breath.
Millions of millions of shocks are received every second from the
arrives just in time to repeat the action of its predecessor, the
the arrivals were not so timed.
that an assemblage of molecules, operated upon by contending waves,
  This is actually the case when
vapour.
aether to the molecules; in other words, there is no sensible

One striking example of the influence of period may be here recorded.
Carbonic acid gas is one of the feeblest absorbers of the radiant heat
  It is, for example, to a great extent
referred to.
number, emitted by the copper, to which the carbonic acid is
only, we should find carbonic acid more opaque to the radiation from
  Such a source is actually found in
main radiating body.
copper, olefiant gas absorbs ten times the quantity absorbed by
  Of the rays emitted by a carbonic oxide flame,
  This wonderful
the fact, that the periods of the hot and cold carbonic acid are
motion to the molecules which synchronise with them.
the tenth an atmosphere of carbonic acid, enclosed in a tube four feet
  of the radiation from carbonic oxide
  of

In fact, the presence of the minutest quantity of carbonic acid may be

long, the absorption there effected by the carbonic acid of the breath
  of the entire radiation.
indeed be employed as a means of determining practically the amount of
  My late assistant, Mr.
while under my direction, made this determination.
produced by the breath freed from its moisture, but retaining its
  Carbonic acid, artificially
action of the mixture upon the rays of heat was the same as that of
  The percentage of the former being known,
  The same breath, analysed
 Frankland, and physically by Mr.
following results:
Percentage of Carbonic Acid in the Human Breath.


66                                4.

33                                5.

competent to take up, we have a practical measure of the carbonic acid
lungs.

competent to account for the whole of the observed facts.
as far as we know, accepts vibrations of all periods with the same
  To it the oscillations of an atom of free oxygen are just
that the vibrating oxygen then stands so far below the olefiant gas in
peculiarity.
olefiant gas, produces many thousand times the disturbance caused by
powerful hold upon the aether than single atoms can.
probably very potent cause of the difference may be, that the
[Footnote: See 'Physical Considerations,' Art.
] are generated

of the process, it will still remain true, that to account for the
the shape, size, and condition of the aether within the molecules, by

********************
16.

Let us now cast a momentary glance over the ground that we have left
  The general nature of light and heat was first briefly
influence of the act of combination on radiation and absorption, were
  Through the transparent
while many of the compound gases presented almost impassable obstacles
  This deportment of the simple gases directed
to the discovery that the element iodine, dissolved in bisulphide of
the light of the spectrum from its heat, intercepting all luminous
the red to pass freely through it.
to filter the beams of the electric light, and to form foci of
obtainable in ordinary fire.
refractory ones were raised to a white heat, by the concentrated
  Thus, by exalting their refrangibility, the invisible
of the solar spectrum were extracted from utter darkness.
richness of the electric light in invisible rays of low refrangibility
luminous rays.
rays was proved, and experiments were then added to show that the
incandescence, are strengthened together; intense dark heat being an
  A sun could not be
  The
radiation, their unspeakable importance to us is due to the fact, that

Among the vapours of volatile liquids vast differences were also found
  We followed various
states of aggregation, the power of the individual molecules equally
  The position of a vapour as an absorber of radiant heat was

vapours not as the recipients but as the originators of wave-motion;
absorption and radiation went hand in hand, the self-same chemical act
rendering it competent, in the same degree, to generate them.
were next subjected to examination, and, notwithstanding their
absorptive power, to the body of the air in which they were diffused.
We were led thus slowly up to the examination of the most widely
atmosphere, and we found in it a potent absorber of the purely
  The power of this substance to influence climate, and
briefly dwelt upon.
protect it from nightly chill; and thus the aqueous vapour of our
saves the surface of our planet from the refrigeration which would
voids of space.
molecular form, on absorption and radiation, and finally deduced, from
expired by the human lungs.

recent enquiries in the domain of Radiation, and my aim throughout has
processes involved in our researches.
natural science has a deadening influence on the imagination, and a
necessarily have this effect.
must, I think, have convinced you, that the study of natural science
  Throughout the

waves, which eye has never seen nor ear heard, and which can only be
  This, in fact, is the
connect the phenomena of our visible world with those of an invisible
  Without imagination we never could have risen to the conceptions
exercising this faculty aright, and of associating definite mental
which you will derive from this lecture.

  We
illuminate and warm the world.
'What is light, and what is heat?' and this question leads us at once
 [Footnote: This
  See
 II.

is felt and seen, but which is incomplete, by something unfelt and
part discerned, not only the nature of light and heat, but also,
  The
which all its phenomena are but special forms.
itself in tangible and in intangible matter, being incessantly
the change.
of the sea; the latter--derived as they are from winds, which in their
heaped-up motion of the aether waves.
emitted by the sun which heat our air, produce our winds, and hence
  And whether they break in foam upon the shore, or
friction of their own parts, the sea waves, which cannot subside
aether, thus regenerating the motion from which their temporary
  This connection is typical.
aggregate of independent parts, but an organic whole.
piano and sing into it, a certain string will respond.
pitch of our voice; the first string ceases to vibrate, but another
  Change again the pitch; the first two strings are silent,
  Thus is sentient man acted on by Nature, the
strings differently tuned, and responsive to different forms of the

********************
III ON RADIANT HEAT IN RELATION TO THE COLOUR AND CHEMICAL

[Footnote: A discourse delivered in the Royal Institution of Great
 19, 1866.

a discipline of the mind, is to enable us by means of the sensible
  The sensible
the length of the line is not limited by the boundaries of the senses.
Indeed, the domain of the senses, in Nature, is almost infinitely
lies beyond them.
within the range of his telescope, an astronomer can calculate its
means of data furnished in the narrow world of the senses, we make
the intellect alone.

heat?' have occurred to the minds of men; but these questions never
'What is sound?' Amid the grosser phenomena of acoustics the mind was
observation, which were afterwards applied to phenomena of a character
  Sound we know to be due to
  A vibrating tuning-fork, for example, moulds the
with a certain measured velocity, impinge upon the drum of the ear,
sound.
vibrations of the air.
into a bell when it is sounded, feels through the common nerves of his
are translated into sound.
sonorous vibrations not only tangible but visible; and it was not
scientific investigator abandoned himself wholly, and without a shadow
outside of us, a motion of the air.

doubt that the sensation of sound is produced by an agitation of the
due to an agitation of the optic nerve.
advance of that ancient notion which regarded light as something
  But if light
the agitation?  Newton, you know, supposed minute particles to be shot
to hang like a target at the back of the eye.
particles against the target, Newton believed to be the cause of
 But Newton's notion has not held its ground, being entirely
notion that light, like sound, is a product of wave-motion.

beyond the reach of our senses.
for their formation and propagation; but we cannot see, or feel, or
  How, then, has its existence been
intangible aether, all the phenomena of optics are accounted for, with
the intellect unsatisfied.
suggested itself to the mind of Newton, what did he do?  He set
  He
the moon's fall towards the earth; he considered the precession of the
the law of gravitation.
established, and the verdict of science subsequently confirmed his
  On similar, and, if possible, on stronger grounds, we
  It
Newton based his law.
which the aether is proved incompetent to explain, we should have to
  It is,
means of which suns and stars diffuse their radiant power, as that it
planetary system, but the immeasurable heavens themselves.

line of thought, from the world of the senses into the region of pure
  I mean by imagination here, not that play of fancy which
power which enables the mind to conceive realities which lie beyond
processes which, though mighty in the aggregate beyond all conception,
  It is the
audible.
overhead which render them luminous to us; but so minute are these
end to cover a single inch.
their minuteness.
the retina at the backs of your eyes, in the time consumed in the
  This is the
it without previous discipline.
waves of light, nor even imagined them to exist, had we not previously
  Sound and light are now
strengthened, and defined by the conceptions of the other.

celestial space, swathing suns, and planets, and moons, but it also
  It is the
that the aether conveys.
in our sensations, are light and heat.
pulses through the aether, resembles a tuning-fork sending its pulses
  Let us look for a moment at this thrilling medium,
conveys.
possess very different powers of agitating the aether: some are good
constituted as to communicate their atomic motion freely to the
others are unable thus to communicate their motions, but glide through
  Recent
anomalous conditions, belong to the class of bad radiators.
vibrating in the aether, resembles a naked tuning-fork vibrating in
  The amount of motion communicated to the air by the thin

the result, in many cases, is an enormous change in the power of
  The amount of aethereal disturbance, produced by the
the same atoms when uncombined.

vibrations, or, in other words, on the length of its waves.
pitch of a note answers to the colour of light.
white light from the sun, or from an electric lamp, and causing the
  We
into the splendours of the solar spectrum.
spectrum we have red light, at the other, violet; and between those
  As we advance along the
use the expression--heightens, the sensation of violet being produced
impression of red.
rapid as those of the red; in other words, the range of the visible

There is no solution of continuity in this spectrum one colour changes
  It is as if an infinite number
same time.
from the incandescent vapour of silver--you observe that it consists
  Here it is as if
  The
of them, placed end to end, would fill an inch.
produce the second band are a little shorter; it would take of these
  In the case of the first band, the number of
millions of millions; while the number of impulses imparted, in the
  We may
which these bands were derived.
incandescent vapour of silver.
that vapour are as rigidly fixed as those of two tuning-forks; and to
rapidity of its vibrations, and consequently its colour, which wholly

The vapour of water, as well as the vapour of silver, has its definite
when acting freely as such, from being raised to a white heat.
oxyhydrogen flame, for example, consists of hot aqueous vapour.
scarcely visible in the air of this room, and it would be still less
  But the
is more than dirty; and the burning dirt gives to this flame the
  But the heat of the flame is
  Cast iron fuses at a temperature of 2,000° Fahr; while the
  A piece of
beyond the visible termination of the flame.
produces incandescence is here absolutely dark.
the platinum is raised to dazzling whiteness, and is even pierced by
  When this flame impinges on a piece of lime, we have the
  But the light is here due to the fact that
body by the flame are of periods different from its own.

of vibration, and surrounded by a medium which accepts their
  But suppose the waves
how will the waves be affected?  Will they be stopped, or will they be
on which they impinge, or will they glide round the molecules, through

beautifully exemplified by an experiment on sound.
tuning-forks are tuned absolutely alike.
rapidity, and, mounted thus upon their resonant cases, you hear them
  Stopping one of the forks, I
silent fork, but not into contact with it.
in this position for four or five seconds, and then stopping the
  The second fork has taken

its stand, I throw the dismounted fork into strong vibration.
cannot hear it sound.
which it can communicate to the air is too small to be sensible at any
  When the dismounted fork is brought close to the mounted
mellow sound.
transferred from the dismounted fork to the mounted one.

necessary that the two forks should be in perfect unison.
of wax not larger than a pea be placed on one of the forks, it is

  The pulses of the one fork
  A single
infinitesimal space.
vibration another pulse is ready to strike it.
themselves together.
held near each other, the vibrating fork sent 1,280 waves against its
all, as I have said, perfectly timed, have given such strength to the

Another curious illustration of the influence of synchronism on
three glass tubes of different lengths.
caused to emit a musical note, the pitch of which is determined by the
  The shorter the tube the
  The flames are now silent within their
proper note sounded anywhere in this room.
a syren, a powerful musical note, of gradually increasing pitch, can
  Beginning with a low note, and ascending gradually to a
tube.
  The
  But by urging the
third alone remains.
  Thus, as
flame in passing, by striking it with a series of waves whose periods

Now the wave-motion from the syren is in part taken up by the flame
upon a multitude of flames, instead of upon one flame only, the
wave motion.
  This blue
acid gas.
or, in other words, in a state of intense vibration.
resembles the sounding fork, while this cold carbonic acid resembles
  What is the consequence?  Through the synchronism of
by the latter, the transmission of the radiant heat being thus
  The cold gas is intensely opaque to the radiation from
other kind.
which lies at the basis of spectrum analysis, and which has enabled
stars, and even the nebulae are composed; the principle, namely, that
is competent in the same degree to absorb that ray.
depends on the synchronism existing between the vibrations of the atoms
the atoms on which they impinge.

adds a similar incompetence to absorb white light.
example, absorb the luminous rays of the sun, though it can absorb the
  This incompetence of the vapour to
really transparent substances.
inability to absorb luminous rays.
are in dissonance with luminous waves; and hence such waves pass
 A
incompetent to melt ice.
luminous beam upon a surface covered with hoar frost, without melting
  How then, it may be asked, are the
they are not swept away by sunshine at all, but by rays which have no
  The luminous rays of the sun fall upon the
they find next to no lodgment within the crystals.
all absorbed, and hence they cannot produce fusion.
powerful dark rays is emitted by the sun; and it is these that cause
fill the banks of the Arve and Arveyron, and liberate from their

Placing a concave silvered mirror behind the electric light its rays
  Placing in the path
introducing at the focus a piece of ice, the ice is not melted by the
  Matches, at the same place, are ignited, and wood
  The powerful heat, then, of this luminous beam is
  On withdrawing the cell of water, the

cease to fall.
absorption on the luminous rays, still it withdraws something from the
 This
  Again, I place
first through our cell of water and then through the ice.
a lens an image of the slab is cast upon a white screen.
sifted by the water, has little power upon the ice.
occurs when the water is removed; we have here a star and there a
larger before our eyes.
serrated, but there is no deviation from the six-rayed type.
here, in fact, the crystallisation of the ice reversed by the
  They take the molecules down in
the substance with which Nature every winter roofs our ponds and

Numberless effects, apparently anomalous, might be adduced in
  These two
other by the eye.
both--from such rays these powders acquire no heat; still one of them,
lamp, that it first smokes and then violently inflames, while the
  Placing two
boils in a couple of seconds, while the other, in a similar position,
  The boiling-point of the first liquid is 78°C,
which is never reached at all.
the unseen element which mingles with the luminous rays of the
  of its calorific

A substance, as many of you know, has been discovered, by which these
lamp.
but bright as a diamond to the non-luminous, radiation.
mercilessly cuts off the former, but allows the latter free
  When these invisible rays are brought to a focus, at a
invisible image of their source.
transformed into a visible one of dazzling brightness.
moreover, be shown, if time permitted, how, out of those perfectly
colours of the solar spectrum.
rays, powerful as they are, and sufficient to fuse many metals, can be
producing the least luminous impression.

convergence.
the air at the focus is just as cold as the surrounding air.
the conclusion to which this leads.
to be practically detached from the air,--that the most violent

set London on fire.
temperature at which it throws off brilliant scintillations.
heat platinum to whiteness, and almost fuse that refractory metal.
actually can fuse gold, silver, copper, and aluminium.
moreover, that wood is placed at the focus it bursts into a blaze.

absorption, the elementary atoms possess but little power.
be illustrated by a long array of facts; and one of the most singular
substance, phosphorus, when placed at the dark focus.
impossible to ignite there a fragment of amorphous phosphorus.
ordinary phosphorus is a far quicker combustible, and its deportment
  It may be exposed to

focus, of sufficient power to raise platinum to a red heat, without
  Notwithstanding the energy of the aethereal waves here
the elementary body exposed to their action, the atoms of that body
refrangibility, and consequently cannot be affected by their heat.

practical question.
are found to be cooler than dark ones.
Franklin placed bits of cloth of various colours upon snow, exposed
in the snow.
all.
best absorbers, and white ones the worst absorbers, of radiant heat.
Let us test the generality of this conclusion.
is coated with a very dark powder, and the other with a perfectly
  I place the powdered surfaces before a fire, and leave
attain in this position.
heated?  It requires no thermometer to answer this question.
pressing the back of the card, on which the white powder is strewn,
 Placing
  The white
  This simple
from the experiments of Franklin.
delicate mercurial thermometers at the same distance from a gas-flame.
The bulb of one of them is covered by a dark substance, the bulb of
  Both bulbs have received the radiation from
stands much higher than that of the other thermometer.
experiment might be varied in a hundred ways: it proves that from the
power of absorption.

only one portion, and that the smallest one, of the rays impinging on
  Were the rays all luminous, we might with
the great mass of the radiation from our fire, our gas-flame, and even
which colour teaches us nothing.
the one class of rays, and highly opaque to the other.
powder, which has shown itself so powerful an absorber, has been
visible rays, and its extreme imperviousness to the invisible ones;
transparency to the invisible, and its extreme opacity to the visible,
  In the case of the radiation from our fire, about 98 per cent
which was most opaque to these triumphed as an absorber, though that

And here it is worth while to consider the manner in which we obtain

harmony; and the main value of physics, considered as a mental
the demonstration of this harmony.
are the counters of the intellect; and our science would not be worthy
useful, and neglected the laws which accompany and rule the phenomena.
Let us endeavour, then, to extract from the experiment of Franklin all
predecessors have already stored.
of the same texture, the one black and the other white, placed upon
  Fixing our attention on the white piece, let us enquire
all.
the negative.
a sufficient exposure, the bit of cloth will be found on an eminence
relative elevation of the bit of cloth.
rays of the sun, the cloth and the snow are alike powerless; the one
  The cloth is
and particles are incompetent to absorb the luminous rays.
then, the cloth will sink or not depends entirely upon the dark rays
  Now the substance which absorbs these dark rays with the

surrounding snow.
snow on which it rests; and, in consequence of the more rapid fusion
perched upon an eminence like a glacier-table.

absorber, it does not much transcend it.
both these respects.
black cloth, the texture and fabric of which I assume to be the same
  For our object being to compare the effects of
all the other conditions constant.
cloth to be obtained from the dyeing of the white.
without reference to the dye, is nearly as good an absorber of heat as
  But to the absorption of the dark solar rays by
luminous rays, and this great additional influx of heat is far more
  The
of the snow on the dark rays alone.
snow, and this is the complete analysis of Franklin's experiments.

constitution, as influencing most powerfully the phenomena of

With regard to gases and vapours, and to the liquids from which these
conclusive experiments that the acts of radiation and absorption are
condition.
by a multitude of facts, obtained by celebrated experimenters, which
  Mellon, for example, had

 Masson and Courtépée had performed a most elaborate series of
they one and all manifested the same power of radiation.
concluded from their researches, that when bodies are reduced to an
powerful as entirely to mask and override whatever influence may be

But it appears to me that through the whole of these researches an
essential in the operations of experimental philosophy; while an

the quantity of heat emitted by two of the bright surfaces.
radiator of heat one of them far transcends the other.
appear to be metallic; what, then, is the cause of the observed
is coated with transparent gum, through which, of course, is seen the
transparent to luminous rays, is as opaque as pitch, or lamp-black, to
  It is a powerful emitter of dark rays; it is also
  While, therefore, at the present moment, it is
single ray from the metal behind to pass through it.
then, and not the metal, is the real radiator.

their powders and precipitates with gum-water, and laid them, by means
  True, they saw
black, but they saw these colours _through the coat of varnish which
  When, therefore, it was concluded that
of asserting its influence; when it was found that all chemical
common to them all, which showed the observed constancy.
perhaps thousands, of experiments on radiant heat have been performed
be done over again.
which an oversight of so trivial a character has been committed by so
otherwise excellent work.
facts, we arrive at the extremely probable conclusion that the
real radiator in the experiments just referred to.
and deduce their more or less probable consequences from experimental

through a series of phenomena, and emerged from them with a purely
experimental test.

For the purpose of testing our conclusion regarding the influence of
one of them is a compound of mercury, and the other a compound of
  On two surfaces of a cube are spread these bright red powders,
  Filling the cube with boiling water, and
to emit thirty-nine units of heat, while the other emits seventy-four.
This, surely, is a great difference.
having two of its surfaces coated with the same powders, the only
transparent gum.
power.
the unvarnished powders, simply because the gum employed is a better
  Excluding all varnish, and comparing
black, they are also different; and when black and white are compared,
other cases the white radiates far more than the black.
moreover, the absorptive power of those powders, it is found to go
  The good radiator is a good
  From all this it is
heat, colour teaches us nothing; and that even as regards the
rays, conclusions as to the influence of colour may be altogether
  This is the strict scientific upshot of our researches.
it is not the less true that in the case of wearing apparel--and this
Franklin--black dresses are more potent than white ones as absorbers

Thus, in brief outline, have been brought before you a few of the
  If you ask me what is the use of them, I
  If you meant
ever be applied to the roasting of turkeys, or the driving of
confess that they are not at present capable of competing profitably
  Still they may have great uses
that a more aethereal race than we are may cook their victuals, and
  But is it necessary
possible practical applications?  What is the practical value of
good as a means of culture.
  The people who demand
great as a means of culture--that the knowledge of this wonderful
application to justify its pursuit.

judged by their practical issues, unless the term practical be made to
greatest practical triumphs have been episodes in the search after
  The electric telegraph is the standing wonder of
skill, have made the telegraph what it is, are deserving of all
  In fact, they have had their reward, both in reputation and
public always carries in its train.
soul into this telegraphic body?  Who snatched from heaven the fire
men, the one a dweller in Italy, [Footnote: Volta] the other a
consciously set a practical object before them--whose only stimulus
and would have made Caesar quit his victories for the sources of the
  That the knowledge brought to us by those prophets, priests,
triumphant application of their discoveries proves.
another function to fulfil, in the storing and the training of the
has this evening been brought before you, whether any system of
complete, in which the knowledge of Nature is neglected or ignored.


  NEW CHEMICAL REACTIONS PRODUCED BY LIGHT.


1 DECOMPOSITION BY LIGHT.

other words, measured by their absolute energy--the ultra-red waves of
far transcend the visible.
are numerous cases in which the more powerful waves are ineffectual,
timeliness of application, are able to produce great effects.
series of these, of a novel and beautiful character, discovered in
subjecting the vapours of volatile liquids to the action of
light.
Disease' which follows in this volume; and for this reason some

*****
A glass tube 3 feet long and 3 inches wide, which had been frequently
on two stands.
the height and position of both being so arranged, that the axis of

plates of rock-salt, and subsequently by plates of glass.
sake of distinction, I call this tube the experimental tube.
connected with an air-pump, and also with a series of drying and other

A number of test-tubes, like F, fig.
them), were converted into Woulf's flasks.
by a cork, through which passed two glass tubes: one of these tubes
the bottom of the flask, being drawn out at its lower end to an
03 of an inch in diameter.
coat the cork carefully with cement.
of vulcanised India-rubber were invariably employed.

whose vapour was to be examined, was introduced into the path of the
  The experimental tube being exhausted, and
turned on, the air entered the flask through the tube b, and escaped
  Through
and vapour, passing from the flask by the tube a, entered the

The whole arrangement is shown in fig.
electric lamp, ss' the experimental tube, pp' the pipe leading to the
  The
floating matter of the air; the bent tube T' contains caustic potash,
acid and the other the aqueous vapour of the air.

within the experimental tube, or the impurities of the tube itself, is
  When the experiments is made in a darkened room, a
shown by the present mode of examination to be exceedingly filthy.


  The vapour of this liquid was in the first instance
electric lamp was passing through it.
which was then unknown, were observed to form near the place of entry,

The tube being again exhausted, the mixed air and vapour were allowed
  The slightly convergent beam of the electric
  For a moment the tube was
second had elapsed a shower of particles was precipitated on the beam.
The cloud thus generated became denser as the light continued to act,

The lens of the electric lamp was now placed so as to form within the
  The tube was cleansed and
  When the light was sent through it, the
which a moment before was invisible, flashed suddenly forth like a
  The effect was the same when the air and vapour
  The cloud,
electric beam, was invisible in the ordinary light of the laboratory.

could of course be regulated at pleasure.
diminished with the attenuation of the vapour.
mercurial column associated with the experimental tube was depressed
was full.
observe, after some seconds of waiting, a thin streamer of delicate
finally swelling so as to fill it.

  2.

  3.

same as that obtained with air.


The effect, therefore, is not due to any interaction between the

This was further demonstrated by the deportment of the vapour itself.
When it was permitted to enter the experimental tube unmixed with air
  Hence the

This action is not to be ascribed to heat.
the experimental tube, and the air within the tube, the beam employed
  It had been sifted by
double-convex lens of the lamp.
was employed, the effect was still the same; the obscure calorific

My object here being simply to point out to chemists a method of
left to them the examination of the products of decomposition.
group of atoms forming the molecule of nitrite of amyl is obviously
oxide and other products, of which the _nitrate_ of amyl is probably
  The brown fumes of
tube.
not being able to maintain itself in the condition of vapour, would be

In the anterior portions of the tube a powerful sifting of the beam by
posterior portions.
extended halfway down the tube.
lamp was shifted so as to send the beam through the other end of the

Solar light also effects the decomposition of the nitrite-of-amyl
  On October 10, 1868, I partially darkened a small room in the
enter through an open portion of the window-shutter.
the beam was placed a large plano-convex lens, which formed a fine
  The experimental
carried into the partially darkened room.
tube into the cone of rays behind the lens, precipitation within the
  The vapour at the distant end of the
acted on through the divergence of the rays.
second and similar cone was precipitated.


I sought to determine the particular portion of the light which
  When, previous to entering the
the effect was greatly weakened, but not extinguished.
the case with various samples of yellow glass.
introduced before the removal of the yellow or the red, on taking the
beam.
chemically active.
that this must be the case; it is a feeble but distinct yellow: in
transmitted.
which produces chemical action, but the absorbed portion.
the complementary colour to yellow, is here absorbed, and hence the

This reasoning, however, assumes that the same rays are absorbed by
  The assumption is worth testing.
solution of the yellow chromate of potash, the colour of which may be
nitrite of amyl, was found far more effective in stopping the chemical
  But of all substances
act upon its vapour.
which scarcely perceptibly affected the luminous intensity, absorbed
light.

regards their action upon radiant heat, has been already amply
 [Footnote: 'Phil.
' 1864; 'Heat, a Mode of
 61 of this volume.
of amyl, this relation is more specific than in the cases hitherto
the decomposition of the vapour, is shown to be arrested by the

A question of extreme importance in molecular physics here arises:
[Footnote: My attention was very forcibly directed to this subject
Clausius.

by their mutual forces, but still capable of motion among themselves.
The vapour of the nitrite of amyl is to be regarded as an assemblage
  The question now before us is this: In the act of
constituent atoms?  Is the _vis viva_ of the intercepted light-waves

exerted between it and its neighbour molecules.
these forces, and consequently the rate of vibration, would, in this
  Now the
indicates an identical vibrating period on the part of liquid and
the absorption occurs in the main _within_ the molecule.
hardly be supposed, if the absorption were the act of the molecule as
after the substance had passed from the vaporous to the liquid state.

to some extent an illustration of this internal molecular absorption;
relative motions of its constituent atoms would remain unchanged, and
  It is
molecule with the incident waves, that enables the amplitude of those
molecule together is snapped asunder.

liquid and its vapour absorb the same rays.
would, I imagine, deprive light more effectually of its power of
luminous rays.
to do with this combination, those that are absorbed by the chlorine
  A highly sensitive bulb, containing
formation of hydrochloric acid, was placed at one end of an
from the other.
with chlorine, while the explosion was violent and immediate when the
  I anticipate for the liquid chlorine an
the gas.
that chlorine itself is _molecular_ and not _monatomic_.


When the quantity of nitrite vapour is considerable, and the light
precipitated being so large as to whiten the luminous beam.
however, when a well-mixed and highly attenuated vapour fills the
  The effect now to be described was first obtained
liquid which had been accidentally introduced into the passage through

In this case, the electric beam traversed the tube for several seconds
  Decomposition then visibly commenced,
  When the light was very strong, the cloud
  When, on the contrary, the intensity was
  In Brücke's important
pure mastic is dissolved in alcohol, and then dropped into water well
  When the proportion of mastic to alcohol is correct, the
power.
transmitted light yellowish, which latter colour, by augmenting the

But the development of colour in the attenuated nitrite-of-amyl vapour
  The
Bruecke's turbid medium.
seen a richer or a purer blue than that attainable by a suitable

Iodide of Allyl.
concentrated electric light, iodide of allyl, in point of rapidity and
  With the
vehicle, and found the effect in all cases substantially the same.
cloud-column here was exquisitely beautiful.
axis of the decomposing beam; it was nipped at certain places like an
cloud-filaments twisted themselves in spirals.
into convolutions resembling those of shells.
of the atmosphere in the Alps I have often observed clouds of a
iodide-of allyl vapour a similar lustre was most exquisitely shown.
With a suitable disposition of the light, the purple hue of

The remark already made, as to the bearing of the decomposition of
applies here also; for were the absorption the work of the molecule as
it is combined.
obscure heat is illustrated by its marvellous transparency to such
  May not its synchronism with the waves of light in the present

--The action of light upon the vapour of this
many beautiful reactions may be overlooked, in consequence of this
  After some minutes' exposure, however,
continues to act.
substance the column of cloud filling the experimental tube, was
  In one
and left, issued an axis uniting the globe with two adjacent
  Both globe and cylinders were animated by a common motion
  As the action continued, paroxysms of motion were
other with sudden violence.
grotesque cloud-forms were developed.
mass would become ribbed so as to resemble the graining of wood; a
transverse bands, the retarding influence of the sides the tube
the Mer de Glace.
commotion were most intense; here buds of cloud would sprout forth,
  The cloud
materially from all others that I had seen.
was observed in the last twelve inches of the tube; the vapour of
precipitated particles which, mingling with the purple of the iodine,
  As in all other cases here adduced, the effects

The forms assumed by some of those actinic clouds, as I propose to
differences of temperature, are perfectly astounding.
myself here with a meagre description of one more of them.

through it, the lens at the same time being so placed as to produce a
  Two minutes elapsed before anything was
hang itself on the most concentrated portion of the beam.

experimental tube.
same bluish tint as themselves.

resolved itself into a series of parallel disks of exquisite delicacy,
finally blended to a screw surface with an inclined generatrix.
gradually changed into a filmy funnel, from the narrow end of which

The latter also underwent slow but incessant modification.
resolved itself into a series of strata resembling those of the
  After a little time, and through changes which it
series of concentric funnels set one within the other, the interior
  Those of the distant cloud
  As many as six funnels were thus
delicate cord of cloud already referred to.
tubes were afterwards formed, which coiled themselves in delicate

Rendering the light along the connecting-cord more intense, it
the enlargement of its particles.
the funnels melted into two ghost-like films, shaped like parasols.
They were barely visible, being of an exceedingly delicate blue tint.
They seemed woven of blue air.
gauze would be to liken them to something infinitely grosser than

In all cases a distant candle-flame, when looked at through the cloud,

2.

[Footnote: In my 'Lectures on Light' (Longman), the polarisation of
]
1869.

account of a new Series of Chemical Reactions produced by Light, the
thus acted on being considerably increased.

incidentally in the preceding pages--the blue colour of the sky, and
  Reserving the historic treatment of the
these questions constitute, in the opinion of our most eminent
  Indeed it
of singular speculative power, addressed to myself, that caused me to

The apparatus with which I work consists, as already stated, of a
5 to 3 inches internal
  The vapour to be examined is introduced into this tube in
electric lamp is permitted to act, until the neutrality or the

It has hitherto been my aim to render the chemical action of light
  For this purpose substances have been chosen,
a boiling-point so high, that as soon as the substance is formed it
  By graduating the quantity of the vapour, this
particles distinguishable by the naked eye, or far beyond the reach of
  I have no reason to doubt that
fraction of the length of a wave of violet light.

attenuated, no matter what the liquid may be, the visible action
  But here I must guard
  The
 To
illuminated by a powerful beam of light.
many important particulars from the finest ordinary clouds, and might
clouds and true vapour.
'incipient cloud,' or 'actinic cloud,' as I propose to employ it,

I had been endeavouring to decompose carbonic acid gas by light.
faint bluish cloud, due it may be, or it may not be, to the residue of

vision being horizontal, it was found that when the short diagonal of
greater than when the long diagonal was vertical.
tourmaline was held between the eye and the bluish cloud, the quantity
to the axis of the illuminating beam, was greater than when the axes

This was the result all round the experimental tube.
crystal of tourmaline to revolve round the tube, with its axis
reached the eye was in all its positions a maximum.
crystallographic axis was parallel to the axis of the beam, the

From the illuminated bluish cloud, therefore, polarised light was
angles to the illuminating beam; the plane of vibration of the
 [Footnote: This is
favour, and it is in my opinion so much preferable to have a physical
phraseology in the text.

actinic cloud, displayed the colours of polarised light, these colours
experimental tube.
circle, thinnest at the centre, and augmenting uniformly in thickness
  When placed in its proper position between
rings.

described.
proper substances, and by the application, in proper quantities, of
  Benzol, bisulphide of carbon, nitrite of amyl,
substances may be employed.
illustrative of the means adopted to secure the best result, with

And here it may be mentioned that a vapour, which when alone, or mixed
shows but a feeble result of this action, may, when placed in
action.
diffused in the atmosphere, resists the decomposing action of solar
plants, has its molecules shaken asunder.

until the experimental tube, which had been previously exhausted, was
  The visible action of light
  The tube
vapour, and a second half-atmosphere of air which had been permitted
  On sending the
empty.
dense cloud being immediately precipitated upon the beam.

almost to justify the application of the term instantaneous.
dense cloud, looked at perpendicularly to its axis, showed scarcely
  Looked at obliquely the polarisation was

The experimental tube being again cleansed and exhausted, the mixed
associated mercury column was depressed 1/10 of an inch.
words, the air and vapour, united, exercised a pressure not exceeding
  Air, passed through a solution of
depressed three inches.
passed for some time through this mixture without revealing anything
  Soon, however, a
continued blue sufficiently long to permit of its thorough
  The light discharged from the cloud, at right angles to
  It could be totally
  By degrees the cloud became of whitish blue,
normally, were exceedingly brilliant.
polarisation was distinctly at right angles to the illuminating beam.
This continued to be the case as long as the cloud maintained a
to whitish blue.
coarser and whiter, particularly at its centre, where it at length
perpendicular, while it continued to do so at both ends.

normally, showed vivid selenite colours when looked at obliquely,
texture of the cloud.
subsequently.

nitrite-of-butyl vapour in a still more attenuated condition.
instance here cited is representative.
substances, the cloud formed at the commencement, when the
made to display a colour rivalling that of the purest Italian sky.
all cases, moreover, this fine blue cloud polarises _perfectly_ the beam
of 90° with the axis of the illuminating beam.

decay of this polarisation.
first appearance the light from a vividly illuminated actinic cloud,
with its longer diagonal vertical.
rendered impure by the growth of the particles--in other words, as
portion of the light passing through the prism in all its positions.
It is worthy of note, that for some time after the cessation of
is in its position of minimum transmission, is of a gorgeous blue, the
 [Footnote: This shows
light of lower refrangibility.
sufficiently coarse to approximate to that of ordinary clouds, the
quantity of light discharged normally.

the illuminating beam, is also illustrated by the following
of the electric lamp, was placed between the lamp and the experimental
  A few bubbles of air, carried through the liquid nitrite of
three inches (measured by the mercurial gauge) of air which had passed
  Sending the polarised beam through
its axis, my assistant occupying a similar position behind the tube.
The short diagonal of the large Nicol was in the first instance
also vertical.
visible to both my assistant and myself, was slowly formed.
cloud, so deep and rich when looked at from the positions mentioned,
upwards_.
directions.
the eye of the observer being on the level of the beam, and the line
horizontally occurred when the longer diagonal of the large Nicol was
  But now a vivid blue cloud was seen when looked at
  This truly fine experiments, which I
by a remark in a letter addressed to me by Professor Stokes.

has hitherto been, that, in accordance with the law of Brewster, which
reflection which produces perfect polarisation would require to be
men, Brewster himself among the number, to entertain the idea of
 [Footnote: 'The cause of the
something.
polarisation 76°, we should look to water or ice as the reflecting
and a hot summer's day of unevaporated molecules (particles?) of
  But though we were once of this opinion, careful observation
that therefore whatever be the body on which the light has been
must be 45°, and the index of refraction, which is the tangent of that
in air upon air!' (Sir John Herschel, 'Meteorology,' par.
)
Any particles, if small enough, will produce both the colour and the
  But is the existence of small
atmosphere inconceivable?  It is to be remembered that the oxygen and
exceedingly attenuated vapour of the higher atmosphere being therefore
]
I have, however, operated upon substances of widely different
as ordinarily defined, but the polarisation of the beam, by the
independent of the polarising angle.
apply to matter in this condition, and it rests with the undulatory
  Whenever the precipitated particles are
may be, the direction of maximum polarisation is at right angles to
condition being invariably 45°.

but with an aperture on the sunward side through which a parallel beam
  Surrounded by
that of the parallel beam of the electric lamp through an incipient
  The sunbeam would be blue, and it would discharge laterally
incipient cloud.
to all intents and purposes that which I have called a 'blue cloud.
Conversely our 'blue cloud' is, to all intents and purposes, an
' [Footnote: The opinion of Sir John Herschel,
verified by the foregoing results.
polarisation of skylight] is considered,' writes this eminent
its explanation when arrived at will probably be found to carry with
quantity of light it actually does send down to us.
too,' he adds, 'that it is only where the purity of the sky is most
that where there is the slightest perceptible tendency to cirrus it is
' This applies word for word to our 'incipient
']
But, as regards the polarisation of the sky, we know that not only is
the solar beams, but that at certain angular distances, probably
polarisation, exist, on both sides of which the planes of atmospheric
  I have made various
but, pending the more complete examination of the question, the

The parallel beam employed in these experiments tracked its way
dusty air of London.
the matter thus floating in the laboratory air consists of organic
the air.
of polarisation obtained with the incipient clouds.
discharged laterally from the track of the illuminating beam was
being at right angles to the beam.
moreover, throughout its entire length, the light emitted normally was
  Keeping the positions of the Nicol
the entire beam, when the line of vision was perpendicular to its

The horizontal column of air, thus illuminated, was 18 feet long, and
  I placed myself near the
through the Nicol and selenite more and more obliquely at the beam,
  Augmenting the
complementary to the former ones.

sides of which the light was polarised in planes at right angles to

Thinking that the action observed in the laboratory might be caused,
light removed to a room at the top of the Royal Institution.
track of the beam was seen very finely in the air of this room, a
  This beam exhibited all the
  Even the
though faintly, the effects of polarisation.

matter, it no longer exerted any sensible action upon the light, but
  The light is scattered and polarised by

By operating upon the fumes of chloride of ammonium, the smoke of
ways those experiments on neutral points, when my attention was drawn
the Paris Academy in 1860 by Professor Govi, of Turin.
Comptes Rendus,' tome li, pp.
] M.
examine a beam of light sent through a room in which were successively
  His first brief
his second communication he announced the discovery of a neutral point
planes at right angles to each other.

action of the sky, the direction of maximum polarisation in M.
experiments enclosed a very small angle with the axis of the
  The question was left in this condition, and I am
 Govi or any other investigator has pursued it

I had noticed, as before stated, that as the clouds formed in the
discharged at right angles to the beam became weaker, the direction of
  Experiments on the
position of the neutral point was not constant, but that it varied

The examination of these questions led to the following new and
incense, and sufficient time being allowed for their uniform
  From the
maximum polarisation, instead of being perpendicular, now enclosed an

A neutral point, with complementary effects at opposite sides of it,
  The angle enclosed by the axis of the
measured in the first instance 66°.

portion of the incense-smoke being permitted to escape.
darkening the room and turning on the light, the line of vision to the
angle of 63°.

being permitted to escape.
was found to be 54°.

found to recede lower and lower down the beam, the angle between a
falling successively from 54° to 49°, 43° and 33°.

corresponding to the foregoing series of observations, were these:
1st observation   2 feet 2 inches.


3rd observation   2 feet 10 inches.


5th observation   3 feet 7 inches.


At the end of this series of experiments the direction of maximum

The laboratory was next filled with the fumes of gunpowder.
successive experiments, corresponding to five different densities of
the neutral point and the axis of the beam, were 63 degrees, 50°, 47°,

After the clouds of gunpowder had cleared away, the laboratory was
irritating to the lungs.
enclosed, in this case, an angle of 12°, or thereabouts, with the axis
  Looked at, as in the former instances, from a position
entire extent of the beam.

the ring-system, though not brilliant, was distinct.
upon the plate of selenite, and the line of vision perpendicular, the
  The resinous fumes
 It
  Continuing to look in the same direction, the
ones.
consequent upon the attenuation of the fumes of resin_.

were obtained.
illustrate the variability of the position of the neutral
 [Footnote: Brewster has proved the variability of the position
obviously connected with the foregoing experiments.

illuminated beam, the brilliancy of the selenite colours may be
  But with different clouds two different effects are
  Let the ring-system observed in the common air be brought
of ammonium be thrown into the beam at the point looked at; the ring
polarisation remains unchanged.
phosphorus, or sulphur, is burned underneath the beam, so as to cause

intensified; but in none of these cases is there any change in the

But when a puff of the fumes of hydrochloric acid, hydriodic acid, or
the selenite tints.
polarisation 90°, causing the centre of the ring-system to change from
colours.
change of the polarisation from positive to negative may indicate a

but it will require much following up before it emerges into
]
Almost all liquids have motes in them sufficiently numerous to
obtained by simple artificial devices.
distilled water is placed in front of the electric lamp, and a thin
polarised light is discharged, and scarcely any colour produced with a
 But if a bit of soap be agitated in the water above
liquid sends forth laterally almost perfectly polarised light; and if
  A still
excess of alcohol.

to the collective quantity of individually invisible particles in a
  Commencing with distilled water, for example, a thick slice
particles sensible.
while, with Bruecke's precipitated mastic, a slice too thin to produce
vividly the selenite colours.

  THE SKY OF THE ALPS.

retina of the observer.
space by its excess or defect of light in relation to that space.
altering the illumination, either of the object itself or of its
  Take the case of

of both, that appearance depending, as stated, upon differential

Now the light of the sky, being polarised, may, as the reader of the
while the light of a common cloud, being unpolarised, cannot be thus
  Hence the possibility of very remarkable variations,
also in the aspect of the clouds, which have that firmament as a
  It is possible, for example, to choose clouds of such a
they shall vanish, being undistinguishable from the residual dull tint
  A cloud
eye, to appear dark on a bright ground, is suddenly changed to a white
  When
polarisation, the quenching of the surrounding light causes it to
 Last Easter eve the Dartmoor sky, which

and cirri floated southwards.
these floating masses seemed like dull embers suddenly blown upon;

In the Alps we have the most magnificent examples of crimson clouds
under the best possible conditions.
Alpenglow was very fine, though it did not reach its maximum depth and
  The side of the Weisshorn seen from the Bel Alp, being
the rose-coloured buttresses of the mountain.
from a point a few hundred feet above the hotel.
though for the most part in shade, had a crimson projection, while a
  Four distinct
covered with pure snow--were reddened by the light of sunset.
shoulder of the Alphubel was similarly coloured, while the great mass
Monte Leone.

protuberance was strong or weak according to the position of the
  The summit also underwent striking changes.
of the prism it exhibited a pale white against a dark background; in
background.
but the whole mountain also passed through wonderful changes of
  The air at the time was filled with a silvery haze, in
  This could be wholly
astonishing solidity and detachment from the surrounding air.
changes of the Dom were still more wonderful.
could be removed from the sky behind it, for it occupied the position
  By a little practice with the Nicol it was
instantaneous.
buttresses, and the summit of the Dom, together with the shoulder of
  This was immediately
  It was not the
produced this startling effect; the air between them and me was highly
remarkably the distinctness of the mountains.

  At 10
M.
were powerfully affected by the Nicol.
line drawn to the Dom being very nearly perpendicular to the solar
  The grey
distinguished from the opalescent haze around it; but when the Nicol
in bold definition.
these effects the only things changed are the sky behind, and the
because the light emitted from the sky and from the haze is plane
mountains, being sensibly unpolarised, is not directly affected by the
  It will also be understood that it is not the interposition of
that it is the _light_ of the haze which dims and bewilders the eye, and

These results have a direct bearing upon what artists call 'aerial
' As we look from the summit of Mont Blanc, or from a
mountains be darkly coloured--covered with pines, for example--every
blue haze which renders the relations of the mountains as to distance
  When this haze is regarded through the Nicol
because the light which it emits in this direction is wholly
  When this happens, aerial perspective is abolished, and
plane.
and beyond the gorge is a high ridge darkened by pines.
may be projected upon the dark slopes at the opposite side of the
throwing the distant mountains far away.
day the haze may be quenched, and then the Massa ridge and the

 The
 At
to see its colour, the attention must be withdrawn from the mountains
  In point of fact, the haze is a
and is subject to the same laws, as the firmament itself.
the sky, not _under_ it.

selenite, plate, with which the readers of the foregoing pages
  On some of the sunny days of August the
was very remarkable.
opposite to my place of observation yielded a series of the most
had the darkness of the pines at the opposite side of the Rhone
colours were not much diminished in brilliancy.
distance across the valley, as the crow flies, to the opposite
under favourable circumstances, produce chromatic effects of

Again: the light of a landscape, as of most other things, consists of
always of the same colour as the light which falls upon the landscape;
which compose the landscape, and it is this portion of the total light
  The white light
ejected by internal reflection; each distinct substance absorbing and
constitution.
appears in such colours and variations of colour as, after the sifting
  Thus the bright green of grass, or
mingled with an amounts of light derived from superficial reflection.
A certain hard brilliancy is conferred upon the woods and meadows by
  Under certain circumstances, it
of the grass and foliage.
richness and softness of tint which they never show as long as the
emission.
large-leaved trees still better; while a glimmering field of maize
rotating Nicol.

1869, to the top of the Aletschhorn.
foregoing paragraphs were for the most part reproduced on the summit
  I scanned the whole of the sky with my Nicol.
alone, and in conjunction with the selenite, it pronounced the
polarisation.

  The
pages could, in this respect, be rendered far more perfect than the
appearance when the polarisation of the artificial sky ceases to be
the case of the firmament, outlived the extinction of the brilliancy.
With certain substances, however, artificially treated, this dull

All along the arc from the Matterhorn to Mont Blanc the light of the
Nicol.
  I
the Nicol from one position to another so rapidly as to render the
  When
of light and darkness resembled the play of sheet lightning behind the
  There was an element of awe connected with the suddenness
changed their aspect and definition under the operation of the prism.


skies is, I trust, correctly given in the essay on the Scientific use

********************
V.

[Footnote: A discourse delivered before the Royal Institution of Great
]
Experiments on Dusty Air.

illuminating the dust floating in the air.
Culverwell, 'discovers atomes, though they be invisible by
'
In my researches on the decomposition of vapours by light, I was
 It was essential that
no substance capable of scattering light in the slightest sensible
'experimental tube' in which the vapour was enclosed.

matter, which, though invisible in diffuse daylight, was at once
  Two U-tubes were placed in
vapour was to be carried into the experimental tube.
U-tubes contained fragments of marble wetted with a strong solution of
sulphuric acid which, while yielding no vapour of its own, powerfully
 [Footnote: The apparatus is
 3.
Institution, sent through these tubes at a rate sufficiently slow to
tube a considerable amounts of mechanically suspended matter, which
  The effect was
the liquid acid, and through the solution of potash.

October 5, 1868, prior to sending the air through the drying
spirit-lamp flame.
been burnt up by the flame.
  I was
the dust of our air was, in great part, inorganic and non-combustible.
[Footnote: According to an analysis kindly furnished to me by Dr.
Percy, the dust collected _from the walls_ of the British Museum
  of inorganic matter.
confidence in the results of this distinguished chemist; they show
heavier matter.
following passage from Pasteur: 'Mais ici se présente une remarque: la
constamment à des courants d'air, qui doivent soulever des particules
préférence les corpuscules organisés, oeufs ou spores, moins lourds
']
I had constructed a small gas-furnace, now much employed by chemists,

]
the air to pass through it, ensured the practical contact of the dust
  The air of the laboratory was permitted
sometimes through the heated, tube of platinum.
of the following fragment of a long table the quantity of air operated
air-pump.
mentioned, and in the third the state of the air in the experimental

Quantity of air   State of platinum tube  State of experimental tube
15 inches                 Cold                  Full of particles.


The phrase 'optically empty' shows that when the conditions of perfect

*****
In a cylindrical beam, which strongly illuminated the dust of the
  Mingling with the flame,
intensely black smoke.
the beam, the same dark masses stormed upwards.
than the blackest smoke ever seen issuing from the funnel of a
most practised observer to conclude that the apparently pure flame of
its clouds of liberated carbon.
question presented itself in a moment and was thus answered: A red-hot
ascended.
those whirling masses of darkness, far more copiously than either the
 Smoke was therefore out of the question.
[Footnote: In none of the public rooms of the United States where I
  The organic dust
  Certain rooms in England--the Brighton Pavilion, for
]
What, then, was the blackness?  It was simply that of stellar space;
the beam of all matter competent to scatter its light.
was placed below the beam the floating matter was destroyed _in situ_;
the illuminated particles, and substituted for their light the
  Nothing could more
things visible.
the transparent air, while, at both sides of the gap, the thick-strewn
illumination.

stream of darkness.
generated which shall displace the floating matter, and appear dark
  I noticed this effect first on
remain there until its temperature had fallen below that of boiling
  The dark currents, though much enfeebled, were still produced.
They may also be produced by a flask filled with hot water.

the two ends of the wire being connected with the two poles of a
  To regulate the strength of the current a rheostat
  Beginning with a feeble current the
reached the heat of ignition, a flat stream of air rose from it, which
blackest lines of Fraunhofer in the purified spectrum.
of this dark vertical band the floating matter rose upwards, bounding
  What is the explanation?
did not equally lighten the floating matter.
of pure air therefore passed upwards among the inert particles,
impassable black partition.
render an account of the dark currents produced by bodies at a

But when the platinum wire is intensely heated, the floating matter is
  I stretched a wire about 4 inches
cotton-wool, which also surrounded the rim.
a white heat by an electric current, the air expanded, and some of it
  When the current was interrupted,
motes along with it, being filtered by the wool.
this experiments the shade was charged with floating matter; at the

On the wooden base of a cubical glass shade, a cubic foot in volume,
inches of platinum wire were stretched in four parallel lines.
ends of the platinum wire were soldered to two stout copper wires
a battery.
cotton-wool.
matter.
  In five
minutes it was totally consumed.

all floating particles, produce, when poured or blown into the beam,
  Coal-gas does the same.
glass shade, placed in the air with its mouth downwards, permits the
  When coal-gas or hydrogen
gradually fills the shade from above downwards.
occupies the space crossed by the beam, the luminous track is
  Lifting the shade so as to bring the common boundary of
  After the shade
smoke among the illuminated particles.


There is no respite to our contact with the floating matter of the
its presence, but that so small a portion of it, and even that but

that epidemic diseases generally were propagated by a kind of malaria,
such matter was taken into the body through the lungs, skin, or
which itself had been assailed.
the case of yeast.
lump--a mere speck of matter, in this supposed state of decomposition,

the human frame?  In 1836 a very wonderful reply was given to this
  In that year Cagniard de la Tour discovered the
feeds, grows, and reproduces itself, and in this way carries on the
  By this striking discovery

Schwann, of Berlin, discovered the yeast-plant independently about the
result, that when a decoction of meat is effectually screened from
never sets in.
by the air, but by something which could be destroyed by a
  The results of Schwann were confirmed
other methods, pursued by Schultze, and by Schroeder and Dusch, led to

But as regards fermentation, the minds of chemists, influenced
notion of matter in a state of decay.
yeast-plant, but the dead or dying parts of it, which, assailed by
  Pasteur, however, proved the real
the reputed ferments their necessary food.

them and others, has run the germ theory of epidemic disease.
notion was expressed by Kircher, and favoured by Linnaeus, that
enter the body, and produce disturbance by the development within the
  The strength of this theory consists in the
of life.
produce a whole crop of acorns, each gifted with the power of
whole forest may spring; so, it is contended, these epidemic diseases
meeting in the human body their proper food and temperature, finally
  There is nothing to my
and self-multiplication possessed by the matter which produces
  If you sow wheat you do not get barley; if you sow
multiplied, and nothing else.
reproduces itself as rigidly as if it were (as Miss Nightingale puts

Parasitic Diseases of Silkworms.

It is admitted on all hands that some diseases are the product of
  Both in man and in lower creatures, the existence
  I am enabled to lay before
and successfully combated by M.
  For fifteen years a plague
  They had sickened and died
furnished only a fraction of the normal quantity of silk.
silk culture of France produced a revenue of one hundred and thirty
  During the twenty previous years the revenue had
augmentation.
26,000,000 kilogrammes; in 1865 it had fallen to 4,000,000, the fall

The country chiefly smitten by this calamity happened to be that of
Academy of Sciences.
Pasteur, and besought him, with an earnestness which the circumstances
malady.
his inexperience in reply to his friend.
qualities needed for such an enquiry to accept Pasteur's reason for
  'Je mets,' said he, 'un prix extréme à voir votre
misére surpasse tout ce que vous pouvez imaginer.
plague had been showered upon the public, the monotony of waste paper

 Cornalia in 1860, 'is
  Gases, liquids, and solids have
  From chlorine to sulphurous acid, from
invoked in behalf of this unhappy insect.
moreover, welcomed with ready trustfulness every new remedy, if only
 It seemed impossible to
  In 1863 the
francs for the use of a remedy, which its promoter declared to be
  It was tried in twelve different departments of France,
  In no single instance was it successful.
It was under these circumstances that M.
entreaties of his friend, betook himself to Alais in the beginning of
  As regards silk husbandry, this was the most important
plague.

proved by Bassi to be caused by a vegetable parasite.
propagated annually by the parasitic spores.
often sowed the disease in places far removed from the centre of
  Muscardine is now said to be very rare, a deadlier malady
  This new disease is characterised by the
applied to the plague by M.

worms, in the languor of their movements, in their fastidiousness as
  The course of discovery
the blood of silkworms vibratory corpuscles, which he supposed from
  Filippi, however,
motion; but he committed the error of supposing the corpuscles to be
  Possessing the power of indefinite
form and substance of its disease.
Cornalia; while Lebert and Frey subsequently found the corpuscles not
  Osimo, in
founded, in 1859, a practical method of distinguishing healthy from
  The test often proved fallacious, and it was never

These living corpuscles take possession of the intestinal canal, and
  They fill the silk
motions of spinning, without any material to work upon.
instead of being filled with the clear viscous liquid of the silk, are
  On this feature of the plague
  The cycle of the silkworm's life
grows, and casts its skin.
or three times at intervals during the life of the insect.
last moulting the worm climbs the brambles placed to receive it, and
  It passes thus into a chrysalis; the
which form the starting-point of a new cycle.
the plague-corpuscles might be incipient in the egg, and escape
the microscope.
becoming larger and more defined.
pronounced than in the worm; while in the moth, if either the egg or
corpuscles infallibly appear, offering no difficulty of detection.
This was the first great point made out in 1865 by Pasteur.
Italian naturalists, as aforesaid, recommended the examination of the
  Pasteur showed that both eggs
eggs or such worms being sure to entail disaster.
his starting-point in seeking to regenerate the race.

Sciences in September, 1865.
  Here,
presuming to lay down the law for the physician and biologist on a
  'On trouva étrange que je fusse
paru depuis longtemps en Italie, dont les résultats montraient
pratique dans la direction que je m'étais engagé.
fut grande au sujet des recherches sans nombre qui avaient paru depuis
' Pasteur heard the buzz, but he continued his work.
choosing the eggs intended for incubation, the cultivators selected
  But they
their selected eggs; for they did not know, and nobody prior to
envelope doomed corpusculous moths.
the cultivators accept new guidance.
if possible determine their practice, Pasteur hit upon the expedient
  In 1866 he inspected, at St.
different parcels of eggs intended for incubation.
sufficient number of the moths which produced these eggs, he wrote out
a sealed letter in the hands of the Mayor of St.

In 1867 the cultivators communicated to the mayor their results.
letter of Pasteur was then opened and read, and it was found that in
prediction and the observed facts.
totally; the others had perished almost totally; and this was the
  In two out of the fourteen cases, instead of
  Now,
owners.
labour expended on them would prove remunerative.
the moth-test for a few minutes in 1866, would have saved the labour
  Two additional parcels of eggs were
  He pronounced them healthy;

circumstantial, are recorded in Pasteur's work.

investigation, and followed out with admirable skill and completeness
 From moths
selecting 10, 20, 30, 50, as the case might be, he introduced into the
 It was first permitted to accompany the
 Let its take a single example out of many.
corpusculous worm in water, he smeared the mixture over the
 Assuring himself that the leaves had been eaten, he
 Side by side with the
possible out of the way of infection.
témoin,'--his standard of comparison.
infected thirty worms.
 On the
intestines of two of them.
infected repast, two fresh worms were examined, and not only was the
was charged with corpuscles.
worms were covered by the black spots of _pébrine_.
difference of size between the infected and non-infected worms was
bulk of the healthy ones.
fourth moulting was examined.
parasite as to excite astonishment that it could live.

only six out of the thirty remained.
lot, but on being searched they also were found charged with
 Not one of the thirty worms had escaped; a single meal had
 The standard lot, on the contrary, spun their fine
the parasite, which had doubtless been introduced during the rearing

As his acquaintance with the subject increased, Pasteur's desire for
corpuscles seen in the field of his microscope from day to day.
a contagious repast the number of worms containing the parasite
 per cent.
of corpuscles would at the same time rise from 0 to 1, to 10, to 100,

 He inoculated healthy worms with
disease.
infliction of visible wounds with their claws.
washed the claws, and found corpuscles in the water.
the spread of infection by the simple association of healthy and
 By their claws and their dejections, the diseased
  It was no hypothetical infected medium--no
organism.
and its existence demonstrated.
antecedents, the investigation was exhaustive, the skill and beauty of
clearness of his thought.

in which his researches stand to the important question on which he


microscopist, in presence of large educations which present the
be erroneous if he confines himself to the knowledge which preceded my
  The worms will not present to him the slightest spot of
the mortality of the worms will be null or insignificant; and the
  Our observer would, therefore,
incubation.
these fine crops have been poisoned; that from the beginning they
beyond measure in the chrysalides and the moths, thence to pass into
  And what is
In our experiments we can, so to speak, touch it with our fingers.
is entirely the effect of a single corpusculous repast; an effect more
eaten the poisoned food.


  It
husbandry.
reports which reached him of the application and the unparalleled
publication.
with the most surprising results.
led to this triumph.

been exposed to the most obstinate and unjust contradictions; but I
book.
following weighty words: 'Il est au pouvoir de l'homme de faire
comme c'est ma conviction, la doctrine des générations spontanées est
'
Pasteur dwells upon the ease with which an island like Corsica might
  And with regard to
 Simon describes an extraordinary case of insular
  Of the 627
diseases which, in whole or in part, were prevalent in all the others:
single death by small-pox, nor a single death by scarlet-fever.
why?  Not because of its general sanitary merits, for it had an
  Doubtless, the
  It was the district of
contagion should come from without.
approximative proof that, at least for those ten years, no _contagium_
smallpox had arisen spontaneously within its limits.
that there were only seven districts in England in which no death from
of the Scilly Isles was one.

Flacherie_, co-existent with _pébrine_, but quite distinct from it, has
  Enough, however, has been said to
for further information.
 Pasteur,


vaincu que je suis par la maladie, en vous faisant observer que vous
connaissance de ce livre, et des principes que j'établis touchant la
  Beaucoup de ces colonies pourraient cultiver
vous convaincrez aisement qu'il est facile aujourd'hui, nonseulement
de la soie une prospérité qu'elles n'ont jamais eue.


Prior to Pasteur, the most diverse and contradictory opinions were
affirmed it, others as stoutly denied it.
agreed.
rendered epidemic by some occult and mysterious influence, to which
' Those acquainted with our
here.
diseases to 'deleterious media' which arise spontaneously in crowded
  According to them, the _contagia_ of
  On
ideas and methods of research, contending that the matter which
  It
such.
diseases, than they do in the spontaneous generation of mice.
for example, found that _pébrine_ had been known for an indefinite time
  The development of it which he combated
into open conflagration of a previously smouldering fire.
nothing surprising in this.
special _contagium_ to produce it, surrounding conditions must have a
  Common seeds may be duly sown,
restrict, or altogether prevent, the subsequent growth.
therefore, from the point of view of the germ theory, the exceptional
harmony with the method of Nature.
spoken of as if it were a new disease of the last twenty years; but
 Simon tells me that about three centuries ago tremendous epidemics
afterwards in Italy; and that since that time the disease has been
  In or about
 Starr, of Liskeard, in a communication to the
characters which have recently again become familiar, but under the

reappearance, again showed predilection for that remote county.
also believe that the Black Death, of five centuries ago, has
 Simon finds that it is
parts of India.

  When I was at the Bel
the breaking out of scarlet-fever among his children.
remember rightly, on the healthful eminence of Dartmoor, and it was
place.
manifestly fixed.
this notion, and thus deflect him from the truth, while those of
however foul, the power of generating _de novo_ a specific disease.
After close enquiry he recollected that a hobby-horse had been used
through scarlet-fever.

they used to be.
to time together in London.
epidemic disorder be not present, a corrupt atmosphere, however
  But, if the germs
distributors of disease and death.
epidemic, but cannot produce it.
transport of the special germ or virus, disease may develop itself in

If you see a new thistle growing in your field, you feel sure that its
  Just as sure does it seem that the
place where it newly appears.
not to be surpassed, Dr.
place to place; showing how they plant themselves, at distinct foci,
as grains of corn might be carried in the pocket and sown.
to whose remarkable work, 'Du Typhus contagieux,' Dr.
directed my attention, gives the following striking case, both of the
noir que j'avais en visitant une malade attaquée de scarlatina, et que
et demi, me communiqua, dès que je fus arrivé, cette maladie
était jusqu'alors presque inconnue.
 de Mussy
who was suffering from a dropsy, evidently the consequence of
  The original disease, being of a very mild character, had
leave no doubt upon the mind as to the nature and cause of the
  But then the question arose, How did the young lady catch
and it was only after she had been a month in the house that she was
  The housekeeper at length cleared up the mystery.
young lady, on her arrival, had expressed a wish to occupy a room in
  Her desire was granted; and in that room, six
scarlatina.
had been permitted to remain.

shown itself in this mysterious way, but where a strict examination
  Is it, then,
cause of specific disease, merely because in special cases the
nature, and who are most ready to admit, as regards even higher things
these rash hypotheses.


Not only medical but still more especially surgical science is now
  Upon it the
  As
Schwann; but the illustrations of this theory adduced by Professor
imperative, their introduction here.

attention which they appeared to me to have deserved.
fermentation of sugar was generally allowed to be occasioned by the
to an analogous agency.
parallel.
albumen in the other, undergoes extraordinary chemical changes under
regarded chemically, we should suppose inert.
in the case of putrefaction, let us take a circumstance often
  In order to
matter by means of a canula and trocar, such as you see here,
it, and projecting beyond it.
thrust into the cavity of the abscess, the trocar was withdrawn, and
pressure over the part to prevent the possibility of regurgitation.
The canula was then drawn out with due precaution against the reflux
  This method was frequently successful as to its immediate
fluid, and experiencing no inconvenience from the operation.
pus was pretty certain to reaccumulate in course of time, and it
  And unhappily

even though the puncture seemed healing by first intention, that
second day, and, on inspecting the seat of the abscess, the skin was
irritation, while a rapid reaccumulation of the fluid was found to
  Under these circumstances, it became necessary to open
the size of the abscess, say, for example, a quart, of pus escaped,
  Now, how had this change been brought about?
it could have been given.
introduction of something from without.
wound, even supposing it to have occurred, would not explain the
  For mere inflammation, whether acute or chronic, though
  The
to account for the alteration in its quality but the influence of
  And what could that
subsequent precautions, prevented the entrance of oxygen.
you allowed that a few atoms of the gas did enter, it would be an
effect such changes in so large a mass of albuminous material.
Besides, the pyogenic membrane is abundantly supplied with capillary
flowing; and there can be little doubt that the pus, before it was
disposed to exert upon it.

circumstances is quite inexplicable.
theory, the difficulty vanishes at once.
been lying exposed to the air, dust will have been deposited upon
silver tube, and in that protected situation will fail to be wiped off
  Then when the
upon the margin of the canula, which is left projecting into the
to be washed off by the stream of out-flowing pus, but may be

sure to contain the germs of putrefactive organisms, and if one such
temperature of the body, and account for all the phenomena.

and the vinous fermentation, as regards the greatness of the effect
speaking, of the cause, you will naturally desire further evidence of
  You can see with the microscope
  Is there, you may ask, any
is.
it is found to be teeming with myriads of minute jointed bodies,
energy of their movements.
fact, that the entire mass of that quart of pus has become peopled
and trocar; for the matter first let out was as free from vibrios as
  If this be so, the greatness of the
surprising.
living structures that they possess extraordinary powers of effecting
to their energy as mere chemical compounds.
that the animalcules which have been developed in the albuminous
constitution, just as we ourselves alter that of the materials on
 [Footnote: 'Introductory Lecture before the University
']
In the operations of Professor Lister care is taken that every portion
they fall upon the wound they should be killed as they fall.
this in view he showers upon his exposed surfaces the spray of dilute
surrounds the wound in the most careful manner with antiseptic
  To those accustomed to strict experiment it is manifest
distinct object in view, which he pursues with never-tiring patience
  And the result, in his hospital practice, as
too shocking to be mentioned here, and in the neighbourhood of wards
gangrene, he was able to keep his patients absolutely free from these
  Let me here recommend to your attention Professor
which I have already quoted; his paper on The Effect of the Antiseptic
article in the 'British Medical Journal' of January 14, 1871.

with properly filtered air, the result would, he contends, be the
  In a room where the germs not only float but cling to clothes
  But surgery is
with air that has passed through the lungs, and it is a most
 Professor
interpretation of this fact, which he describes and comments upon

fracture of the ribs, if the lung be punctured by a fragment, the
undergoes no decomposition.
pleural cavity in such abundance that, making its way through the
whole body.
the blood in the pleura were to putrefy, it would infallibly occasion
  Why air introduced into the pleural
effects from that entering directly through a wound in the chest, was
putrefaction, when it at once occurred to me that it was only natural
offices is to arrest inhaled particles of dust, and prevent them from

*****
I shall have occasion to refer to this remarkable hypothesis farther

The advocates of the germ theory, both of putrefaction and epidemic
contained in the air.
not a vapour nor a gas, nor indeed a molecule of any kind, but a
 [Footnote: As regards size, there is probably no sharp line
into the other.
atom or the molecule, if free, is always part of a gas, the particle
  A particle is a bit of liquid or solid matter, formed by
]  The term 'particulate 'has
Council to describe this supposed constitution of contagious matter;
 Sanderson's experiments render it in the highest degree
small-pox is 'particulate.
exceeding importance, because in the treatment of _particles_ methods

The Luminous beam as a means of Research.

eminent names, has been also an object of varied and ingenious attack.
On this point I will only say that when angry feeling escapes from
places itself athwart the intellect, it is liable to produce all
  Thus my censors, for the most part, have
against claims which were never made.
matter is this: During the autumn of 1868 I was much occupied with the
part described in the preceding article.
been my habit to make use of floating dust to reveal the paths of
reverse the process, and employ a luminous beam to reveal and examine
 In a paper presented to the Royal Society in December, 1869,
the question of spontaneous generation, and the germ theory of


Prior to the discovery of the foregoing action (the chemical action of
), and also during the experiments
obtaining experimental tubes absolutely clean upon the surface, and
  Neither condition is,

For however well the tubes might be washed and polished, and however
beam infallibly revealed signs and tokens of dirt.
present, and it was sure to deposit some impurity.
processes, not conducted in a vacuum, are open to this disturbance.
When the experimental tube was exhausted, it exhibited no trace of
(containing caustic potash and sulphuric acid), a _dust-cone_ more or
beam.

carried mechanically from the U-tubes into the experimental tube.
Precautions were therefore taken to prevent any such transfer.
produced little or no mitigation.
that the dust of the external air could find such free passage through
  This, however, was the case;
  They also passed with freedom
  In fact, it requires
and afterwards to destroy them.
the flame of a spirit lamp, or through a platinum tube heated to
  It was
  I tried to
  Close pressure was
  A plug of the wool, rammed
found competent to hold back the motes.
time afterwards, and gave me much trouble; but they were invariably
crack or flaw in the sealing-wax employed to render the tubes
  Thus through proper care, but not without a great deal of
with air or vapour, contains nothing competent to scatter the light.
The space within it has the aspect of an absolute vacuum.


The simple apparatus employed in these experiments will be at once

)  s s' is the glass experimental tube, which has varied in length

  Connected with
vapour is to be examined; then follows a U-tube, T, filled with
U-tube, T, containing fragments of marble, wetted with caustic potash;
tightly fitting plug of cotton-wool.
the attack of such vapours as act on mercury, as also to facilitate

Through the cork which stops the flask F two glass tubes, a and b,
  The tube a ends immediately under the cork; the tube
the liquid.
small the orifice through which the air escapes into the liquid.

turned carefully on.
the caustic potash, and the sulphuric acid in succession.
purified, it enters the flask F and bubbles through the liquid.
Charged with vapour, it finally passes into the experimental tube,
  The electric lamp L placed at

*****
The facts here forced upon my attention had a bearing too evident to
  The inability of air which had been filtered through
Schroeder and Pasteur: here the cause of its impotence was rendered
  The experiment proved that no sensible amount of
light always arose from suspended particles; and the fact that the
light and of originating life, obviously detached the life-originating

cotton-wool; hence the thing whose removal by the cotton-wool rendered
condition.
was, in these experiments, from all extraneous light, might be
relation to the germ theory.

of this nature; showing that without an amount of care far beyond that
errors of the gravest description.
the chemical method employed by Schultze in his experiments, and so
consequences; that neither acids nor alkalies had the power of rapid
  In short, the employment of
rigidly conducted like those of Pasteur; while it made equally evident

Dr.

But I do not wish to leave an assertion of this kind without
  Take, then, the well-conceived experiments of Dr.
Hughes Bennett, described before the Royal Society of Surgeons in
 [Footnote: 'British Medical Journal,'
 ii.
]  Into flasks containing decoctions of
 Bennett, by an ingenious method,
  The air was driven through two U-tubes, the one

break up the air, so as to prevent the possibility of any germs
'  The air also passed
bulb containing gun-cotton.

 Bennett to believe that his 'bent tubes'
  Previous to the observations just
  But these
  The gun-cotton, moreover, will
packed, and there is no indication in Dr.
so packed.
Dr.
retardation of the development of life, a total absence of it in some

In his first series of experiments, eight flasks were fed with sifted
  In ten or twelve days all the five had
fungi in the others.
interval no fungi appeared.
was a similar exception.
the first and second series were abandoned, and glass stoppers
  Flasks containing decoctions of tea, beef, and hay were
  In every
  These
 Bennett finally

In all these negative cases, the prepared air was forced into the
  Dr.
experiments, in which, previous to forcing in the air, he permitted
  Into four bottles thus treated he forced prepared
  What is his
experiments, had destroyed such germs as had run the gauntlet of his
exposed to a temperature of 212°, _is too rare to support life_.
conclusion is so remarkable that it ought to be stated in Dr.
Bennett's own words.
to a boiling temperature is so expanded as scarcely to merit the name
sustaining animal or vegetable life.

and flourish for a considerable portion of each year in a medium of
 Bennett describes as scarcely
  The inhabitants of the higher Alpine
these, do the same; while the chamois rears its kids in air rarer
  Insect life, moreover, is sometimes exhibited with monstrous

In a fifth series of experiments sixteen bottles were filled with
  Into four of them, while cold, ordinary unheated and
  In these four bottles fungi were developed.
Into four other bottles, containing a boiling infusion, ordinary air
  Into four other
cool, sifted air was pumped--no fungi were developed.
four bottles containing a boiling infusion sifted air was pumped no
  Only, therefore, in the four cases where the
appear.

 Bennett does not draw from his experiments the conclusion to which
  On them, on the contrary, he founds a
theory of spontaneous development.
the idea that the germs could not possibly pass through his potash and
minority of cases, where the air had been sent through these tubes,
fungi.
experiments by an hypothesis which will not bear a moment's
  But, knowing that organic particles may pass unscathed
 Bennett are precisely
  Indeed, their
accuracy with which they were executed.

experiments, and in the reasoning based upon them, is perfectly
enquiry, have rendered themselves competent to judge of good
  He found germs in the mercury used to isolate his
  He was never sure that they did not cling to the instruments he
  Thus when he opened his hermetically
to detach the drawn-out necks of his bottles; and he was careful to
  Using these precautions,
to generate life; while similar flasks, opened amid the vegetation of
  M.
repeated Pasteur's experiments in the Pyrenees, adopting the
different result.
procedure a real precaution.
possible effect.
of a glass shade, so that the smoke shall ascend and fill the shade.
beam sent through the shade forms a bright track through the smoke.
When the closed fist is placed underneath the shade, a vertical wind
temperature, rises from the band, displacing by comparatively dark air
  Unless special care were taken such a wind
 Pouchet's body as he held his flasks above his
wind and the flask, would be annulled.

and significance of which are at once revealed by the luminous beam.
He prepared twenty one flasks, each containing a decoction of yeast,
  He boiled the decoction so as to destroy whatever
filled with pure steam, he sealed his flasks with a blow-pipe.
opened ten of them in the deep, damp caves of the Paris Observatory,
  Of the
  In nine out of
  In all the

Now here is an experiment conducted in Paris, on which we can throw
  Causing our luminous beam to pass through a
germs and its dust, the beam is seen crossing the flask from side to
  But here is another similar flask, which cuts a clear gap out
  It is filled with _unfiltered_ air, and still no trace of
  Why?  By pure accident I stumbled on this flask

filled, in the first instance, with mote-laden air.
optically empty.
life-producing particles attach themselves to the fibres of
  In the present experiment the motes have been brought by
within our closed vessels, into contact with the interior surface, to
  The air of these flasks has deposited its dust,

I had a chamber erected, the lower half of which is of wood, its upper
  It tapers to a
  It measures in plan 3 ft.
  6 in,
  10 in.
crevice that could admit dust, or cause displacement of the air, being
  The electric beam at first revealed

floating matter being noticed as time advanced.
the chamber was optically empty, exhibiting no trace of matter
  Such must have been the case in the
  Were our electric beam sent
showing the indissoluble association of the scattering of light by air

I will now turn to what seems to me a more interesting application of
  My reference to
passed through the lungs cannot produce putrefaction, is fresh in your
  'Why air,' said he, 'introduced into the pleural cavity,
that entering through a permanently open wound, penetrating from
theory of putrefaction, when it at once occurred to me that it was
passages, one of whose offices is to arrest inhaled particles of
'
Here is a surmise which bears the stamp of genius, but which needs
  If, for the words 'it is only natural' we were
be complete.
beam of light.
various pure gases across the dusty track of a luminous beam, the
  I
by the expired air, _towards the end of the expiration_.
repeat the experiment in your presence.
air and breathe through a glass tube across the beam.
condensation of the aqueous vapour of the breath is shown by the
  We abolish
still more simply, by warming the glass tube.
the beam is for a time uninterrupted by the breath, because the dust
displaced.
beam, the darkness of which increases, until finally, towards the end
black hole, in which no particles whatever can be discerned.
deeper air of the lungs is thus proved to be absolutely free from
  It is therefore in the precise condition required
  This experiment may be repeated
  I think it must be regarded
Lister's views and of the impotence, as regards vital development, of
 [Footnote: Dr.
the important observation of Brauell, which shows that the _contagium_
the blood of the foetus; the placental apparatus acting as a filter,
]
Application of Luminous beams to Water.

 It
think, materially aid enquiries conducted with that instrument.
microscopic examination attention is directed to a small portion of
  By the
collective action of the particles being revealed, by the scattered
  Care is taken to defend the eye from the access of all other
delicacy.
scarcely expressible in numbers, and the individual particles of which
the method alluded to, produce not only sensible, but striking,

We will apply the method, in the first place, to an experiment of M.
Pouchet intended to prove conclusively that animalcular life is
 He
that no germ could survive the heat of a hydrogen flame.
overlooked the fact that his aqueous vapour was condensed in the air,
  Indeed the
 Pouchet are
  I will show you some water,
condenser, formed by the bottom of a silver basin, containing ice.
collected liquid is pellucid in the common light; but in the condensed
and minute as to produce a continuous luminous cone.
through the air the water loaded itself with this matter; and the
this great question.

water we drink.
quench your lecturer's thirst; which, in the track of the beam, simply
  And this water is no worse than the
  Thanks to the kindness of Professor Frankland, I
companies.

matter?  The grosser matter, undoubtedly, but not the more finely
  Water may be passed any number of times through
  Water passed
Silicated Carbon Company, has its grosser matter removed, but it is
  Nine-tenths of the light scattered by these
angles to the beam, and this release of the particles from the
  I
this scattering are wholly beyond the range of the microscope, and no
  It is next to
  Mr.
Hartley, for example, some time ago distilled water while surrounded
  It is
  In water from the Lake of
approach to the pure liquid.
carefully filled for me by my distinguished friend Soret.
of the beam through it is of a delicate sky-blue; there is scarcely a

The purest water that I have seen--probably the purest which has been
of ice.
degree of purity.
this purpose: Through the plate of an air-pump passes the shank of a

the funnel a glass receiver.
several times with air, filtered by its passage through cotton-wool,
  But the ice has
necessary to let it wash its own surface, and also to wash the bulb
  The ice is permitted
the large block dwindles to a small one.
impurity has been thus removed from the surface of the ice.
obtained in this way is the purest hitherto obtained.
hesitate to call it absolutely pure.
through it, the track of the beam is not invisible, but of the most
  This blue is purer than that of the sky,
sky.
scattered by the very molecules of the water, and not by matter
  But when we remember that this perfection of
when we consider that a blue in all respects similar is demonstrably
I think, to conclude that we have arrived here at the last stage of
  The evidence, I think, points distinctly to the
farther, even this last delicate trace of blue would disappear.

  Clark's Softening Process.

in England?  Undoubtedly it is.
which constitutes at once an exceedingly clean recipient and a natural
mechanical impurities.
quantities of water are held in store.
cases covered with thin layers of soil, and with very scanty
  Neither opposes much obstacle to the entry of the rain
in is soon oxidised and rendered harmless.
like myself over the downs of Hants and Wilts will remember the
  In fact, the rainfall, instead of
chalk and percolates through it.
tapped, we obtain water of exceeding briskness and purity.
glass globe, filled with the water of a well near Tring, shows itself
  Indeed, it stands to
percolating through so clean a substance, should be pure.
a subject much debated, whether the supply of excellent water which

recommended this source, and have sought to show, not only that its
inexhaustible.
existence; the number of wells sunk in the chalk being so
known.

impurity, labours under the disadvantage of being rendered very hard
  The chalk-water
carbonate of lime per gallon.
be called seventeen degrees of hardness.
tea, bad for washing, and it furs our boilers, because the lime held
  If the water be used cold,
will give a lather.
chalk-water in London.
such water can be softened inexpensively, and on a grand scale.
long known the method of softening water called Clark's process, but
 Homersham, did I see
  The chalk-water is softened for the
softened for the supply of Tring and Aylesbury.
the luxury.

works.
protected, by a concrete roof and layers of pebbles, both from the
  Each reservoir holds 120,000
  Adjacent to these reservoirs are others containing
' These being filled
an engine through apertures in the bottom of the reservoir.
soon dissolves all the lime it is capable of dissolving.
mechanically suspended lime is then allowed to subside to the bottom,

The softening process is this: Into one of the empty reservoirs is
about nine times the quantity of the chalk-water.
immediately disappears--the mixture of the two clear liquids becoming
  The
layer of pure white carbonate of lime is formed at the bottom of the
 A
deep at the Chiltern Hills.
  Had I
  By this process
hardness, to three degrees of hardness.
immediately.
  In the
the freezing point; and it does not freeze in winter if conveyed in
  The reservoirs are covered; a leaf cannot blow into
  It passes
the supply is always fresh and pure.
is supplied to the fortunate people of Tring, Caterham, and

*****
The foregoing article, as far as it relates to the theory which
within the human life, was embodied in a discourse delivered before
  In June 1871, after a brief
recur to the subject in these terms: What is the practical use of
observation of new facts, and the enhancement of that interest through
curiosities are in themselves worth little.
to add to our stock of food, or drink, or clothes, or jewellery.
though thus shorn of all usefulness in themselves, they may, by
entered, become the antecedents of practical consequences.
looking, for example, at our illuminated dust, we may ask ourselves
  How does it act, not upon a beam of light, but upon our
  We find
living, in part dead.
torn rags, smoke, the pollen of flowers, the spores of fungi, and the
  But what have they to do with the animal
been lately drawn by Mr.

Recklingshausen should you happen not to know them.
confirmations of what you say of dust and disease.
I was at his laboratory in Wuerzburg, I examined with him blood that
preserved in little porcelain cups under glass shades.
living and growing.
white corpuscles present, but there were abundant evidences of the
  (I also saw a frog's heart
days, but certainly more than a week).
the same persistent vitality, or absence of putrefaction.
Recklingshausen did not attribute this to the absence of germs--germs
thing to himself, he said the whole mystery of his operation consisted
  The instruments employed were
was similarly treated; and the porcelain cups, though not kept free
  He said he often had
his precautions.

this 'dirt' momentous improvements in surgery, tells us the effect of
  The blood would putrefy
means, you find the putrefying substance swarming with infusorial

We are now assuredly in the midst of practical matters; and with your
occupied a good deal of public attention.
of life, the world is divided, and has for a long time been divided,
absolutely dead matter to certain physical conditions, to evolve from
power of matter) affirming that, in our day, life has never been found
  I belong to the party
  The question has two
it may be purely a mental set or bias on my part that causes me
facts and defective logic, and on the other side firm reasoning and a
  But, judged of
to do with us?  Let us see.
animals that are demonstrably the products of parasitic life, and such
the silkworms of France, referred to at an earlier part of this
  Now it is in the highest degree important to know whether
have been wafted from without to those afflicted with the disease.
means of prevention, if not of cure, would be widely different in the

But this is not all.
is the broad theory, now broached and daily growing in strength and
most successful workers and profound thinkers of the medical
generally, is of this parasitic character.
having introduced this theory to your notice more than a year ago,
  I would certainly renounce in
then have betrayed.
occurred to shake my conviction of the truth of the theory.
briefly state the grounds on which its supporters rely.
respective viruses you may plant typhoid fever, scarlatina, or
  What is the crop that arises from this husbandry?  As
comes from the fig, the grape from the grape, the thorn from the
typhoid fever, the scarlatina virus into scarlatina, the small-pox
  What is the conclusion that suggests itself
all intents and purposes a seed.
the whole range of chemical science you cannot point to an action
life--this demonstrated power of self-multiplication and reproduction.
The germ theory alone accounts for the phenomena.

the attention of the physician of the future will primarily be fixed,
but which may be pushed by foul air into virulent energy of
  You may think I am treading on dangerous ground, that I
  No
  If you wish to learn the impotence of medical practice in
Harveian oration for 1871, by Sir William Gull.
the physician.
done for them is careful nursing.
insist upon it, would favour the idea of their vital origin.
the seeds of contagious disease be themselves living things, it may be
their living habitat in the same destruction.

own métier, in speaking of these things.
  I am dealing with
experimental evidence are alone competent to decide, and regarding
forming an opinion as regarding the phenomena of magnetism or radiant
  'The germ theory of disease,' it has been said, 'appertains to
' Where, I would ask in reply, is the
subject, could for one instant be compared to those of the chemist
who are dull to the reception of truth not originated within the pale
  I cannot better conclude this portion of my
some time ago by Dr.
energy the town of Bristol owes so much in the way of sanitary

'As to the germ theory itself,' writes Dr.
which I have long since made up my mind.
began to think of these subjects I have never had a doubt that the

'It is impossible, in fact, to make any statement bearing upon the
which are of all others _the most distinctive of life_.
writings of the most violent opponent of the germ theory, and, ten to
"self-propagation," "reproduction," "self-multiplication," and so on.
Try as he may--if he has anything to say of those diseases which is
exact equivalents to them.
things, these terms express qualities which are not only inapplicable
inconceivable of them.


Once, then, established within the body, this evil form of life, if
  Medicine as yet
at is to prevent its access to the body.
my mind that I ventured to recommend, more than a year ago, the use of
  I would here repeat my
  But I do not wish
indissolubly with the germ theory.
England where life is shortened and rendered miserable by the
them.
 Greenhow has shown the stony grit deposited in the lungs of
  The black lungs of colliers is another case in point.
In fact, a hundred obvious cases might be cited, and others that are
  We should not, for example, think
might come into play; but the fact is that the dust arising from the
  I went some time
are enamelled by coating them with a mineral powder, and subjecting
  The organisation of the
faultless.
the vessels.
appeared as white and bloodless as the powder with which they worked.
By the use of cotton-wool respirators these women might be caused to

the seed season his men suffered horribly from irritation and fever,
  He asked for help, and I gave
  At the conclusion of the season, this year, he wrote
tied it in front of the mouth; and that with this simple defence he
complaint from his men.

that it becomes wet and heated by the breath.
a remedy for this, a friend forwarded to me from Newcastle a form of
 Carrick, a hotel-keeper at Glasgow, which,

 4.
Under the partition of wire-gauze q r, is a space intended by Mr.
Carrick for 'medicated substances,' and which may be filled with
  The mouth is placed against the aperture o, which fits
a light valve v, which is lifted by the act of inhalation.

valve, v', into the open air.
air in passing through it being filtered of everything it holds in
  The respirator has since taken other forms.

  4.



We have thus been led by our first unpractical experiments into a
  But another step is possible.
Admiring, as I do, the bravery of our firemen, and hearing that smoke
fireman's respirator.

of obvious importance to place it in the power of each of those men to
there to rescue those who would otherwise be suffocated or burnt.
Cotton-wool, which so effectually arrested dust, was first tried; but,
match for the pungent fumes of a resinous fire.
catching the atmospheric germs, M.
on a plate of glass, urged air against the film, and examined the dust
  The moistening of the cotton-wool with glycerine
remain in dense smoke for three or four minutes, after which the
  Reflection suggested that, besides the
state of vapour, would be very imperfectly arrested by the
  These, in all probability, were the cause of the
perfect respirator might possibly be obtained.

  Its result
  All bodies possess the power of
surfaces, and when the condensing body is very porous, or in a fine
remarkable effects.
mixture of oxygen and hydrogen so squeezes the gases together as to
heat of combination may raise the platinum to bright redness.
promptness of this action is greatly augmented by reducing the
  A pellet of 'spongy platinum,'
the gases to explode instantly.
similar power is possessed by charcoal.
cause the oxygen and hydrogen to combine like the spongy platinum, but
condensing power upon the oxygen of the air, as to bring both within
the vapours in the pores of the charcoal.
all kinds may be virtually burnt up; and this is the principle of the
 Stenhouse.
one of these, you may go into the foulest-smelling places without

But, while powerful to arrest vapours, the charcoal respirator is
  The smoke-particles get freely through
  With a number of such respirators, tested in a proper
  This
completely, and then filling them before going into a smoky
  In fact, each solid smoke particle is itself a bit of
vapour.
that produces the irritation.
removed: the carbon particles which convey the irritant by adhesion

first; fragments of charcoal I hoped would stop the second.
first fireman's respirator, Mr.
the one for inhalation, the other for exhalation, was preserved.
the portion of the respirator which holds the filtering and absorbent

  Under the partition of wire-gauze q r at the bottom of the space
with glycerine; then a thin layer of dry wool, c'; then a layer of
cotton-wool.
prejudice to the action.

  A layer
in the densest smoke that we have hitherto employed, it has not been
  In a flaming
carbonic acid to become so dense as to be irrespirable; but in a place
would materially mitigate its action.

the first experiments were made.
resinous pine-wood, lighted the wood, and, placing over it a lid which
of smoke.
and I have remained for half an hour and more in smoke so dense and
be perfectly unendurable.

FIG.

Having thus far perfected the instrument, I wrote to the chief officer
would be of use to him.
valuable.
contrivance of the kind in this and other countries, and had found
  He offered to come and test it
  At my request he
  Our small room was filled
  The three men went
wished them.
slightest inconvenience; that they could have remained all day in the
  Captain Shaw then tested the respirator with the same result,
instrument.


into the smoke respirator.
upon by the simple and less expensive mouthpiece of Mr.
this, in its turn, has been simplified and improved by my assistant
 John Cottrell.
it has already done good practical service.
necessary, in moistening the wool with glycerine.
carefully teazed, so that the individual fibres may be moistened, and
  I cannot recommend the layers of moistened
nothing equals the wool, when carefully treated.

necessity of careful packing, and the enormous comparative power of
officer who commands them.
some recent very trying experiments, he had obtained the best effects
in my first results, which proved the dry so much inferior to the
to bring the matter to a test at his workshops in the City.
good enough to accept my proposal, and thither I went on May 7, 1874.
The smoke was generated in a confined space from wet straw, and it was

At this season of the year I am usually somewhat shorn of vigour, and
wished to test the matter in my own person.
had been in use some days previously, and which was not carefully
dry-wool respirator.
minutes, while the fireman remained there for six or seven minutes.

could not remain more than a minute in the smoke; in fact the first

Thinking that Captain Shaw himself might have lungs more like mine
respirators together; but he informed me that his lungs were very
  He was, however, good enough to accede to my request.
entering the den a second time I repacked my respirator, with due
  I could
greater than mine, and after the lapse of seven minutes I heard him
  In seven and a half minutes he had to quit the place, thus
as long as mine could bear it.
any discomfort, for sixteen minutes, and certainly could have remained
  The advantage arising from the glycerine was thus

During this time I was in a condition to render very material

Helmholtz on Hay Fever.

made by Helmholtz upon himself which strikingly connected hay fever
  About a year ago I received from Professor
account of his observation, to which Professor Binz has added some
  The paper, being mainly intended for English
style might be amended, I think it better to publish it unaltered.

publications on the subject of hay fever, I am led to suppose that
Professor Helmholtz, as far back as 1868, of the existence of uncommon
possibility of arresting their action by the local employment of
  I therefore purpose to republish the letter in which he
observations on this topic.
Cf.
' vol.
]
'I have suffered, as well as I can remember, since the year 1847, from
of which consists in its attacking its victims regularly in the hay
the cooler weather, but on the other hand quickly reaches a great
  An
thin discharge, with which much epithelium is thrown off.
increases, after a few hours, to a painful inflammation of the mucous
headache and great depression, if the patient cannot withdraw himself
  In a cool room, however, these
remains for a few days a lessened discharge and soreness, as if caused
  I remark, by the way, that in all my other
the hay fever has never failed during the twenty-one years of which I
than the times named.
increases, if one is obliged to be much exposed to the sun, to an

'The curious dependence of the disease on the season of the year
mischief.
five years, certain vibrio-like bodies in it, which _at other times I
.
  They are very
good Hartnack's microscope.
isolated single joints that they contain four nuclei in a row, of
  The length of the joints is
004 millimetre.
moderate activity, partly in, mere vibration, partly shooting
temperatures they are very inactive.
arranged in rows upon each other, or in branching series.
some days in the moist chamber, they vegetated again, and appeared
excretion.
contains them which is expelled by violent sneezings; that which drops
  They stick tenaciously enough in the

'When I saw your first notice respecting the poisonous action of
with that substance, thinking that these vibrionic bodies, even if
unpleasant through their movements and the decompositions caused by
  For that reason I made a neutral solution of sulphate of
effective enough, and caused moderate irritation on the mucus
  I then lay flat on my back, keeping my head
both nostrils.
flow in all directions.

hours; I could expose myself to the sun without fits of sneezing and
  It was sufficient to
unfavourable circumstances, in order to keep myself quite free.
[Footnote: There is no foundation for the objection that syringing the
asthma is only the reflex effect arising from the irritation of the
--B.
  If I
day, just before going.
the symptoms disappear completely, but if I leave off they return till

'My first experiments with quinine date from the summer of 1867; this
appeared, and I have thus been able to stop its development

'I have hesitated as yet in publishing the matter, because I have
Physics at the University of Berlin, is, although M.
, no medical
--B.
  There is, it
recurrence and course of the illness, that quinine had here a most
  And this again makes my hypothesis very
frequent one, are at least the cause of the rapid increase of the

I should be very glad if the above lines would induce medical men in

or impossible; I have therefore already suggested the use of Weber's
  Also it will be advisable to
  It can, further, not be repeated
cinchona, the action of which is much less to be depended upon.

 Frickhoefer, of Schwalbach, has communicated to me a second case

  Virchow's 'Archiv.
 li.
 176.
Professor Busch, of Bonn, authorises me to say that he succeeded in
was obliged to abstain from the use of quinine, as it produced an
  In the
that in the meantime two other patients had, by his advice, tried this
 [Footnote: Prof.
had the pleasure of meeting in Switzerland last year, then told me
afloat in early summer in the atmosphere.


 VOYAGE TO ALGERIA TO OBSERVE THE ECLIPSE.


THE opening of the Eclipse Expedition was not propitious.
on Monday, December 5, 1870, was swathed by fog, which was intensified
  At six P.
 I was
" On Tuesday morning the weather was too thick to
  The

become more active, and soon after his departure we steamed down to
  Here the fog had so far lightened as to enable the officers

At three P.
 on Tuesday, December 6, we got away, gliding
Ventnor, and St.
  On Wednesday morning we
  The
tower-like masses of rock of very remarkable appearance.
Channel the sea was green, and opposite Ushant it was a brighter
  On Wednesday evening we committed ourselves to the Bay of
  The roll of the Atlantic was full, but not violent.
had been scarcely a gleam of sunshine throughout the day, but the
  On
blue.
  We had little
cumulus, and nimbus, we had them all.
sometimes dropped from the distant clouds to the sea.

horizon, while we steamed across the rainless circle which was thus
  Sometimes we plunged into the rain, and once or twice, by
  From time to
  At times
midway in air, and its two buttresses on the horizon.
the light of the bow could be quenched by a Nicol's prism, with its
  Sometimes gleaming patches of the
  When viewed in the proper
aperture being thus opened into stellar space.

through the lighter ones seemed to issue the glow of a conflagration.
On Friday morning we sighted Cape Finisterre--the extreme end of the
  Calm spaces of
in front of us was a horizon of portentous darkness.
thus threatening throughout the day.
strengthened to a gale, and at dinner it was difficult to preserve the
  Our thinned company hinted that
  It was very wild when we went to
  I slumbered and slept, but after some time was rendered
the ship's side for a target.
myself from being thrown out.
he had been thrown from his berth, and sent spinning to the other side
  The screw laboured violently amid the lurching; it
against its bearings, causing the ship to shudder from stem to stern.
At times the waves struck us, not with the soft impact which might be
battering-rams.
officers,' until he has experienced a storm at sea.
followed each other at quicker intervals, the screw rattling after
ordinary seemed to reduce the saloon to chaos.
glasses rang, and alarmed enquiries immediately followed.
noises I heard one note of forced laughter; it sounded very ghastly.
Men tramped through the saloon, and busy voices were heard aft, as if

I rose, and not without difficulty got into my clothes.
after-cabin, under the superintendence of the able and energetic
 Brown, a group of blue-jackets were working
  These had become loose, and the helm refused to
  High moral lessons might be gained on shipboard, by
what large effects are heaped up by the addition of infinitesimals.
The tiller-rope, as the blue-jackets strained in concert, seemed
the pull to the lurching of the ship, the mastery of the rudder was
  I had previously gone on deck.
a few members of the eclipse party, who seemed in no mood for
  Nor did I; but I wished to see the storm.
climbed the steps to the poop, exchanged a word with Captain Toynbee,
direction made towards a cleat not far from the wheel.
cleat is a T-shaped mass of metal employed for the fastening of
] Round it I coiled my arms.
the wheel, who stood as silent as corpses, I was alone.

me.
lacked the steadying influence of sufficient ballast.
time practically rudderless, and lay in the trough of the sea.
could see the long ridges, with some hundreds of feet between their
  As
'mountains high' intelligible.
their mechanical might, as they took the ship upon their shoulders,
  The deck sloped sometimes at an angle
Alpine practice, I should have felt less confidence in my grip of the
  Here and there the long rollers were tossed by interference
  The wind caught their crests, and
white.
of the ocean.
revealed, as the scud flew wildly over it.
the eye, while the ear was filled by the groaning of the screw and the

Nor was the outward agitation the only object of interest to me.
was at once subject and object to myself, and watched with intense
  The "Urgent" is an elderly
  She had been built, I was told, by a contracting firm for some
converted into a troop-ship.
and I had heard that one of her boilers, at least, needed repair.
scanty but excellent crew, moreover, did not belong to the "Urgent,"
  Our three lieutenants were
  All this passed swiftly through my mind as the
probably no one on board could say how much of this thumping and
  This uncertainty caused
the face of it.

gradually round to face the waves.
amount of pitching taking its place.
knots to two.
  After a space of calm, when we
  I
to be pitched out of it might be attended with bruises, if not with
  From Friday at noon to Saturday at noon we accomplished
  I
  The "Urgent,"
anything like it.
agreement between these impressions and those so vigorously described
']
All through Saturday the wind, though somewhat sobered, blew dead
  The atmospheric effects were exceedingly fine.
cumuli resembled mountains in shape, and their peaked summits
  At one place this resemblance was
and lying like a _névé_ below the peaks.
cloud-river strikingly like a glacier.
remarkable--spaces of brilliant green between clouds of fiery red.
Rainbows had been frequent throughout the day, and at night a

which it rested, its luminousness was extraordinary.

Cape St.

me.
M.
roused by the banging of the cot against its boundaries.
was now behind us, and we went along at a speed of eleven knots.
felt certain of reaching Cadiz by three.
sight, which some affirmed to be Cadiz Lighthouse, while the
 Out of
course, and steered for the place.
informed us that we were before the mouth of the Guadalquivir, and
  Cadiz was still some

We steered towards the city, hoping to get into the harbour before
  But the pilot who would have guided us had been snapped up by
  We beat about during the
Cadiz.
light.
swarmed apparently a multitude of chimney-stacks.
showed the chimneys to be small turrets.
for there is a dangerous shoal in the harbour.
town as the sun shone upon its white and lofty walls was singularly
  We cast anchor; some officials arrived and demanded a
  We had none.
with us; so the yellow quarantine flag was hoisted, and we waited for
  After some hours' delay the
officer ablaze with gold lace and decorations.
the requisite permission had been granted.
in the afternoon weighed anchor.
excellent paymaster, I was here transferred to a more roomy berth.

Trafalgar, Tarifa, and the revolving light of Ceuta.
very calm, and the moon rose in a quiet heaven.
convex surface downwards, the common boundary between light and shadow
  A pillar of reflected light shimmered up to
  I had previously noticed the
especially among the foam at the bows.
brought up a number of the little sparkling organisms which caused the
  I caught some of them in my hand.
appearance was observed which was new to most of us, and strikingly
  Standing at the bow and looking forwards, at a
streamers were seen rushing towards us.
rapidly turned, like a comet round its perihelion, placed themselves


  Sometimes
rapidity round a sharp curve, and afterwards keep us company.
leaned over the bow, and scanned the streamers closely.
portion of each of them revealed the outline of a porpoise.
of the creatures through the water had started the phosphorescence,
line of light.

carried many porpoise-lengths behind it.


hidden by a belt of haze, through which at length the brighter lamps
  It was like the gradual resolution of a nebula into stars.
As the intervening depth became gradually less, the mist vanished more
bright foil to the sombre mass of rock above them.
calm and the scene so lovely that Mr.
deck till near midnight, when the ship was moored.
to and fro a striking enlargement of the disk of Jupiter was
the planet.
would immediately shrink to a luminous point.
visual persistence.
in all azimuths by the streams of heated air, describing in quick
sensible area.

summit of the rock, boomed.
'Trafalgar' training-ship, which was in the harbour, struck up the
cadets swarmed up the rigging.
belonging to the Gibraltar party we went on shore.
England when we left, but here we had the warmth of summer.
vegetation was luxuriant--palm-trees, cactuses, and aloes, all ablaze
  A visit to the Governor was proposed, as an act

  We sent in our cards,
Excellency.
military bearing.
genial manner.
promenades, and his orange-trees loaded with fruit, in all of which he
  Evidently 'the hero of Kars' had fallen upon
  He appeared full of good nature, and

We sought the town-major for a pass to visit the lines.
awaiting his arrival I purchased a stock of white glass bottles, with
  Mr.
myself, who wished to see the rock, were taken by Captain Salmond to
useful preliminary lesson.
courteous and kindly man, who gave us good advice regarding our
  He sent an orderly with us to the entrance of the lines.
The orderly handed us over to an intelligent Irishman, who was
nothing from us.
hewn through the limestone; looked through the embrasures, which
reached St.
summit of one of the noblest cliffs I have ever seen.

nearer were the English lines, less conspicuously indicated; and
  Behind the Spanish lines rose
  The general
  Doubling
the Signal Station, where we indulged in 'shandy-gaff' and bread and
  Thence to O'Hara's Tower, the highest point of the rock.
was built by a former Governor, who, forgetful of the laws of
port of Cadiz.
edges of the crack.
curious Mediterranean Stair--a zigzag, mostly of steps down a steeply

Passing over the Windmill Hill, we were joined at the 'Governor's
Point.
contains a fine dioptric apparatus of the first order, constructed by
  Chance, of Birmingham.
Convent.
morning were still more conspicuous.
nature showed itself best when he spoke of his old antagonist in arms,
  Chivalry in war is consistent with its stern prosecution.
These two men were chivalrous, and after striking the last blow became
  Our kind and courteous reception at Gibraltar is a

On December 15 we committed ourselves to the Mediterranean.
of Gibraltar with which we are most acquainted represent it as a huge
the other side, is truly noble.
the back of the rock, which I was disposed to regard simply as the
  I wished to let myself down upon it, but had
  My friend Mr.
silica, and that the same sand constitutes the adjacent neutral
  There are theories afloat as to its having been blown from
  The Mediterranean throughout this first day, and indeed
Atlantic.
colour.
out along the crests of the waves formed by the port and starboard
  Its strength was not uniform.
time, it would in part subside, and afterwards regain its vigour.
Several large phosphorescent masses of weird appearance also floated

On the morning of the 16th we sighted the fort and lighthouse of Marsa
of a bay, sheltered by dominant hills.
during our whole voyage we had not had so fine a day.
which had led us to choose Oran as our place of observation seemed
  A rather excitable pilot came on board, and he guided
year from an unexplained outburst of waves from the Mediterranean.
Both port and bow anchors were cast in deep water.
hawsers the ship's stem was made fast to three gun-pillars fixed in

M.
of the eclipse in India in 1868, when he showed the solar flames to be
country about eight miles from Oran.
Paris in a balloon, with a strong young sailor as his assistant, had
 Gambetta, and received
  On the day of our arrival his
 Huggins, and the kind and courteous
place.
and commanded an open outlook; but it was inconvenient for us on
  The place next in repute was
Mole.
eminence in an adjacent garden, the property of Mr.
Scotchman who had settled some years previously as an Esparto merchant
 [Footnote: Esparto is a kind of grass now much used in the
] He, in the most liberal manner, placed his
  Here the tents were pitched,
sappers, the instruments being erected on the Monday under cover of

Close to the railway station runs a new loopholed wall of defence,
  Standing on
is a small bastionet, intended to carry a gun or two.
thought would form an admirable basis for my telescope, while the view
  The
  Two men, one
placed at my disposal by Lieutenant Walton; and, thus aided, on Monday
  The instrument was new to me, and
its manipulation.

 Huggins joined me, and we visited together the Arab quarter of
  The flat-roofed houses appeared very clean and white.
street was filled with loiterers, and the thresholds were occupied by
  Some of the men were very fine.
straight, manly fellows who must have been six feet four in height.
They passed us with perfect indifference, evincing no anger,
passed.
by an Arab.
to me, and muttered something about 'les Anglais.
population of Oran is picturesque in the highest degree: the Jews,
Arabs more picturesque still, and of all shades of complexion--the
preserving its own individuality, formed a picture intensely

On Tuesday, the 20th, I was early at the bastionet.
been very squally.
our key, and on Tuesday morning Elliot went for it.
the intelligence that the tents had been blown down, and the
  Among these was a large and valuable
  It seemed hardly
delicate adjustments, could have escaped uninjured from such a fall.
This, however, was the case; and during the day all the overturned
practical working order.
incessant schooling.
with the intention of devoting myself to the observation of any
  I wished to see the whole--the first contact,
spots, the breaking of the last line of crescent by the lunar
air, the appearance of the corona and prominences at the moment of
of the flames, a glance through a polariscope, a sweep round the
through Bailey's beads, and, finally, the retreat of the lunar shadow

I was provided with a telescope of admirable definition, mounted,

  The telescope grasped the whole of the sun, and a
  But it would not
  For this I had lashed on to
Ross, and lent to me by Mr.
  I was also furnished with an
 Dallmeyer.
more efficiently supported.

embrace in it the entire series of observations.
remained visible, were to be made with an unsilvered diagonal
this fraction, being still further toned down by a dark glass.
moment of totality the dark glass was to be removed, and a silver
and prominences The time of totality was distributed as follows:
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

In our rehearsals Elliot stood beside me, watch in hand, and
  He called out at the end of each interval,
from polariscope to naked eye, from naked eye back to finder, from
retreating shadow.
at the actual sun, and keeping him in the middle of the field.
my object to render the repetition of the lesson so mechanical as to
  Volition was
of routine was to be followed.
the programme would have been strictly carried out.

  For several days the weather had
  We had wind so strong As to render the hawsers at
navigating lieutenant's sleep.
some rain.
cleanse itself, and if it did we were promised air of extraordinary
  Early on the 22nd we were all at our posts.
blue in the early morning gave us some encouragement, but all depended
 Which of
secure the steadiness of my instrument I was forced to retreat behind
further, to avail myself of the shelter of a sail.
fastened the sail at the top, and loaded it with boulders at the
  It was tried severely, but it stood firm.

 The
synchronism with the changes of the sky.
contact a dense cloud intervened; but a minute or two afterwards the
was evident upon the solar disk.
it at frequent intervals; a large group of spots were approached and
  Subsequently I caught sight of the lunar limb as it cut
  The spot was not to be
  The
black surface of the moon; but they thickened more and more, and made
  During these moments I watched
sickle of the sun across the field of the telescope.
and so beautiful.
the sun's boundary.
corona, which was utterly cut off by the dark glass.
the moon beyond the sun was, in fact, confounded with the blackness of

Beside me was Elliot with the watch and lantern, while Lieutenant
note-book.
seemed worthy of remembrance.
free; but it was all to no purpose.
rested upon the landscape some miles away.
illuminated spot within view.
space of blue which might reach us in time.
totality another space towards the zenith became very dark.
atmosphere was, as it were, on the brink of a precipice, being charged
clouds.
clouds did come down, covering up the space of blue on which our hopes
  I abandoned the telescope and walked to and fro
  As the moment of totality approached, the descent towards
  I looked towards a
  At the moment a
southern heavens.
produced in illuminated haze by the shadows of floating cloudlets of
  The beams are practically parallel, but by an effect
their point of convergence.
referred to, lowered upon M.
southern heavens, blotting out the beams as if a sponge had been drawn
  It then took successive possession of three spaces of
  I again looked towards the
  A glimmer as of day-dawn was behind it, and immediately
absent, revived.
corona and flames were concerned, we had been defeated.


  In fact, the clouds which rendered the day
less intense than it would have been had the atmosphere been without
  In the more open spaces I sought for stars, but could find
  There was a lull in the wind before and after totality, but
  I waited for some time on
border of the sun, but in vain.
fell.
up, in the sober twilight Mr.
above the fort of Vera Cruz.
view over the Mediterranean and the flanking African hills.
sunset was remarkable, and the whole outlook exceedingly fine.


the eclipse:
Hour         Deg.

45        56
11.

10        54
12.

39        52
12.

5         52
  1.

44       56
  2.

slight rain fell.

venture out.
 Goodman, I visited a cave in a remarkable

 Busk informs me that a precisely similar breccia, is found at
  During the afternoon,
  The
there in decay, but the fort is now very strong.
hundred fine-looking dragoons were looking after their horses, waiting
  One of their officers
  We had some
  He had been at Sedan, had been taken prisoner,
  He shook his head when we spoke of the
  There was
lightly levelled against French commanders.

smiting the rocks, breaking into foam, and jumping, after impact, to a
  As we returned our
  The Admiral went on
  The little
  Their speed and endurance,
extraordinary.

  For some hours we
it blew heavily against us all the night.
Bay of Almeria, on the 25th, the captain turned the ship, and steered
Christmas night in peace.
snows of the adjacent mountains, while a purple haze was spread over
  I had no notion that Spain possessed so fine a range
  The height is considerable, but
height.
M.
shoal water, the bottom having been evidently stirred up.
adjacent land seemed eroded in a remarkable manner.
floods, which excavate these valleys and ravines, and leave those
  Towards evening I climbed the mainmast, and,
clouds.
slide back to the deck along a rope, which stretched from the
  That night we cast anchor beside the

On the morning of the 27th, in company with two friends, I drove to
 It
  The Peninsular and Oriental mail-boat
  Heavy duties called me homeward, and
gain three days.
she was to start at one, and returned with all speed to the "Urgent.
Making known to Captain Henderson my wish to get away, he expressed


luggage, hastily thrown together, was tumbled in, and we were
  We had nearly four miles to row in about
  For
but the flags were not yet hauled in.
strength, animated by the exhortations of the officer at the helm.
The roughness of the sea rendered their efforts to some extent
  At length
with quickened pace.

  Five minutes'
  The officer waved his cap and I
  'If they could only see us, they might back to us in a
' But they did not see us, or if they did, they paid us no
  I returned to the "Urgent," discomfited, but grateful to

Glad of the quiet, in the sober afternoon I took a walk towards Europa
  The sky darkened and heavy squalls passed at intervals.
Private theatricals were at the Convent, and the kind and courteous
  I failed in my duty in
  St.
outrival, the Mammoth Cave of Kentucky.
 Crookes, Mr.
Carpenter, and myself, guided by a military policeman who understood
  The mouth is about 1,100 feet above
  We zigzagged up to it, and first were led into an aperture
  In

The water drips from the roof charged with bicarbonate of lime.
Exposed to the air, the carbonic acid partially escapes, and the
deposits itself as a solid, forming stalactites and stalagmites.
the exposure of chalk or limestone water to the open air partially
  A specimen of the Redbourne water exposed by Professors
degrees to nine degrees of hardness.
is virtually a hastening of the natural process.
instead of being permitted to evaporate, half the carbonic acid is
half, being precipitated.
and the clear supernatant liquid is limpid soft water.

 Michael's Cave, which is entered
  The floor was somewhat muddy, and the roof and walls
  We soon found ourselves in the midst of a natural temple,
columns were growing to meet each other, upwards and downwards.
water which trickles from the stalactite, after having in part yielded
and there builds the stalagmite.
above and below simultaneously, along the same vertical.
to distinguish the stalagmitic from the stalactitic portion of the
  The former is always divided into short segments by
presents a uniform surface.
cones of stalactite rested on the centres of pillars of stalagmite.
The process of solidification and the consequent architecture were

We followed our guide through various branches and arms of the cave,
apertures, and squeezed ourselves through narrow passages.
to time we halted, while Mr.
magnesium wire, the roof, columns, dependent spears, and graceful
  Once, coming to a magnificent cluster of
  There was some
great.
haunts me still; for, though our requisitions were moderate, this
  Pendent from the roof, in
_live_, as it were, surrounded by organic connections.
are curious, but not beautiful.

   And brought my sea-born treasures home
   Had left their beauty on the shore,

The promontory of Gibraltar is so burrowed with caverns that it has
  They are apparently related to the
  The earliest of
  Suppose a force
Europa Point, and suppose the rock to be of a partially yielding
the greatest amount of twisting being endured near the point of
  Such a twisting the rock appears to have
in passing from south to north, the want of uniformity in the material
the amount of twist.
the west is nineteen degrees; in the Middle Hill, it is thirty-eight
fifty-seven degrees.
strata are vertical, while farther to the south they actually turn

The rock is thus divided into three sections, separated from each
broken.
Spanish 'Tierra Quebrada,' or broken ground.
that the inland caves of Gibraltar are almost exclusively found.
on the observations of Dr.
interesting account of these 'caves, and of the human remains and
 Busk to the
afterwards printed in the 'Transactions' of the Congress.
In this essay Mr.
 Smith, of
the rock.
just referred to, the promontory underwent various changes of level.
There are sea-terraces and layers of shell-breccia along its flanks,
marine erosion.
Mr.
 [Footnote: No
 Busk's paper without a feeling of
the Gibraltar caves, the late Captain Frederick Brome.


resumed a series of observations on the colour of the sea.
out a number of specimens had been collected, with a view to
  But the bottles were claret bottles, of
  At Gibraltar, therefore, I purchased fifteen white
friendly guidance of Mr.
  These
places between Oran and Spithead.

Henderson, the commander of H.
S.
observations in every possible way.
the officers for their unfailing courtesy and help.
placed at my disposal his own coxswain, an intelligent fellow named
with lead, cast it into the sea, and, after three successive rinsings,
  The contact of jugs, buckets, or other
water, afterwards, through the dirty London air.

described.
 168.
illuminated by a powerfully condensed beam, its condition being
 'Care
thus defended, it becomes an organ of inconceivable delicacy.
water of uniform density perfectly free from suspended matter, it
  The track of a
  But 'an amount of
and the individual particles of which are so small as wholly to elude
not only sensible, but striking, effects upon the eye.

places between Gibraltar and Spithead, are here tabulated:
No.


     from Gibraltar                         fine particles
3    Off Cabreta Point      Bright green     Still thick, but less so
4    Off Cabreta Point      Black-indigo     Much less thick, very pure
5    Off Tarifa             Undecided        Thicker than No.

 5
7    Twelve miles           Yellow-green           Very thick


      from Cadiz
10   Fourteen miles         Bright green     Much less thick

     St.

      Strong green     Thick, with fine matter
13   Beyond the Burlings    Indigo           Very little matter, pure
14   Off Cape Finisterre    Undecided        Less pure
15   Bay of Biscay          Black-indigo     Very little matter,




 Catherine's    Yellow-green     Exceedingly thick
19   Spithead               Green            Exceedingly thick
Here we have three specimens of water, described as green, a clearer
miles from the harbour, and off Cabreta Point.
showed the first to be thick with suspended matter, the second less
  Thus the green brightened as

Previous to the fourth observation our excellent navigating
 Brown, steered along the coast, thus avoiding the
to the Mediterranean.
of the Atlantic current, which was defined with extraordinary
  On the one side of it the water was a vivid green, on the
  Standing at the bow of the ship, a bottle could be
the stern could be filled with green water.
one on each side of this remarkable boundary.
Atlantic had the hue called ultra-marine; but looked fairly down upon,
indigo.

indigo, the water becomes suddenly augmented in purity, the suspended
  Off Tarifa, the deep indigo
  Accompanying this
  Beyond
same time in quantity.

yellow-green water; this the London examination shows to be thick with
  The same is true of Cadiz harbour, and also of a
  Here there
accompanying the change a sudden fall in the quantity of suspended
  Between Cape St.
to the deepest indigo, a further diminution of the suspended matter

We now reach the remarkable group of rocks called the Burlings, and
home examination shows it to be thick with fine matter.
twenty miles beyond the Burlings we come again into indigo water, from
  Off Cape
becomes green, and the home examination pronounces it to be thicker.
Then we enter the Bay of Biscay, where the indigo resumes its power,
the water.
held in suspension fine particles of a peculiar kind; the size of them
  It showed itself
line of vision.
taken opposite St.
other at Spithead.
specimens, as might be expected, were pronounced by the home

Two distinct series of observations are here referred to--the one
during the voyage from Gibraltar to Portsmouth: the other carried out
  And here it is to be
in my hands.
upon them, had been tied up, all information regarding the source of
  The bottles were simply numbered, and
opened, and the locality and sea-colour corresponding to the various
  The home observations, therefore, must have
of the green colour with fine suspended matter, and of the ultramarine
with the comparative absence of such matter.

the deep ocean? [Footnote: A note, written to me on October 22, by my
'I have never seen the Lake of Geneva, but I thought of the brilliant
black-blue under cloud, both so solid that one might leap off the
which I saw on my voyages to and from the West Indies.


white light is withdrawn.
immediately accounted for by its action on a spectrum.
the yellow and green, and allows the red and blue to pass through.
blending of these two colours produces the purple.
liquid attacks with special energy the yellow and green, it enfeebles
  By increasing the thickness of the stratum we may
  The colour of a blue liquid is
  It first extinguishes the red; then, as the
succession; the blue alone finally remaining.
extinguished by a sufficient depth of 'the liquid.

of that action of sea-water upon light, to which it owes its darkness.
The spectrum embraces three classes of rays--the thermal, the visual,
  These divisions overlap each other; the thermal
versa.
invisible.

agents in evaporation.
enfeeblement; water attacks all its rays, but with different degrees
  Of the visual rays, the red are first extinguished.
the solar beam plunges deeper into the sea, orange follows red, yellow
where the water is deep enough, follow green.
the solar beam would be the consequence if the water were deep and
  If it contained no suspended matter, such water would be as
  A reflected glimmer of ordinary light would reach us
light, hence no colour, would reach us from the body of the water.

fulfilled, and hence the extraordinary darkness of such water.
indigo, already referred to, is, I believe, to be ascribed in part to
natural water; and in part to the slight reflection of the light from
  A modicum of
absolute extinction has been attained.
occurs under the moraines of glaciers.
compact, and, owing to the absence of the internal scattering common
extinguished, the perfectly clear ice presenting an appearance of
 [Footnote: I learn from a correspondent that certain
]
The green colour of the sea has now to be accounted for; and here,
  A strong
  Fifty

My assistant, Thorogood, occupied a boat, fastened as usual to the
stern of the ship.
and by the time it reached me it had sunk a considerable depth in the
  In all cases the hue of this plate was green.
sea was of the darkest indigo, the green, was vivid and pronounced.
could notice the gradual deepening of the colour as the plate sank,
a blue-green.
a mixture of green and blue.

  The "Urgent" is a screw
the screw-well, through which one could look from the poop down upon
  The surface-glimmer, which so pesters the eye, was here in
  Midway down, a plank crossed the screw-well
the screw underneath.
moderation of the light; and, to remove still further all disturbing
mouth of the well.
watched the screw.
indescribably beautiful, and the contrast between the water, which had
background, was extraordinary.
green, the other of the deepest ultramarine.
above the screw-blade was always ruffled.
formed, by which the coloured light was withdrawn from some places and
 The
former case, and there were other instances of a similar kind.
white bellies of porpoises showed the green hue, varying in intensity
water.

sometimes reached the eye, a beautiful green cap being thus placed

But how is this colour to be connected with the suspended particles?
  Take the dinner-plate which showed so brilliant a green when
  Suppose it to diminish in size, until it
  It would still behave
green light.
were ground to a powder sufficiently fine, and in this condition
to the eye.
examination reveals, act in all essential particulars like the plate,
porpoises.
connected with the matter which it holds in suspension.

  Then ended a voyage which,
memories, both of the aspects of nature and the kindliness of men.


 NIAGARA.

Britain, April 4, 1873.

that they fill the mind with pictures, often exaggerated, often
freshness of first impressions.
with regard to the Falls of Niagara.
estimates of the first observers of the cataract.
exhibition of power so novel and so grand, emotion leaped beyond the
led to disappointment.

Cartier, contains, it is said, the first printed allusion to Niagara.
In 1603 the first map of the district was constructed by a Frenchman
  In 1648 the Jesuit Rageneau, in a letter to his
height.
Brooklyn by its author, Mr.
Hennepin, Kalm, Bakewell, Lyell, Hall, and others I have myself
]  In the winter of 1678 and 1679 the cataract was visited
Great Britain.
serious changes have taken place since his time.
'a great and prodigious cadence of water, to which the universe does
' The height of the fall, according to Hennepin,
  'The waters,' he says, 'which fall from this
making a noise more terrible than that of thunder.
blows to the south its frightful roaring may be heard for more than
' The Baron la Hontan, who visited Niagara in 1687,
  In 1721 Charlevois, in a letter to Madame
predecessors, thus states the result of his own observations: 'For my
cannot allow it less than 140 or 150 feet,'--a remarkably close
  At that time, viz.
the shape of a horseshoe, and reasons will subsequently be given for
origin to its present site.

his predecessors, which, I may say, are repeated to the present hour,
  He is perfectly right.
Niagara are formidable enough to those who really seek them at the
particularly above the fall, its silence, rather than its noise, is
  This arises, in part, from the lack of resonance; the
surfaces to reinforce the shock of the water.
surrounding rocks causes the Swiss Reuss at the Devil's Bridge, when

On Friday, November 1, 1872, just before reaching the village of
the smoke of the cataract.
friend to the northern end of the American Fall.
mood at the time toned down the impression produced by the first
knowing, from old experience, that time and close acquaintanceship,
my final estimate of the scene.
Island, and, turning to the right, reached the southern end of the
  The river is here studded with small islands.
a wooden bridge to Luna Island, and clasping a tree which grows near
precipice like an avalanche of foam.

doubled over the edge of the precipice, like the swell of a muscle,
  The ledge here overhangs, the water being poured out far
  A space, called the Cave of the
water.

and Horseshoe Falls.
residence of the guide to the Cave of the Winds, and from the hut a
precipice.
wandered along the bottom of the cliff.
formation and retreat of the cataract was immediately observed.
thick layer of limestone formed the upper portion of the cliff.
rested upon a bed of soft shale, which extended round the base of the
  The violent recoil of the water against this yielding
unsupported, eventually breaks off, and produces the observed

At the southern extremity of the Horseshoe is a promontory, formed by
which it plunges.
the Terrapin Tower, the door of which had been nailed up because of
  Through the kindness of Mr.
Townsend, the superintendent of Goat Island, the door was opened for
  From this tower, at all hours of the day, and at some hours of
  The river
bursting into foam where it quits the ledge, it bends solidly over,
  The tint is
brighter colour.
is generated, the light falling upon which, and flashing back from it,
emerald-green.
along the ledge, and are immediately drawn into long white striae.
[Footnote: The direction of the wind with reference to the course of a
surface of the sea.
from below, incessantly rustles into whiteness.
resolves itself into a rhythm, the water reaching the bottom of the
  Nor is the spray uniformly diffused through
texture.
the Horseshoe Fall, but majesty is its chief attribute.
the water is not wild, but deliberate, vast, and fascinating.
the Terrapin Tower, the adjacent arm of the Horseshoe is seen
therefore, is left the picturing of the gulf into which the cataract

The delight which natural scenery produces in some minds is difficult
criticised by those who have never experienced it.
deduction from the completeness of the celebrated Thomas Young, that
  'He had really,' says
who thought that no one who was able to live in London would be
' Well, Dr.
 Johnson, had a
them, high as they were, to the exclusion of
    That o'erflowing joy which Nature yields

To all who are of this mind, the strengthening of desire on my part to
seen and known, will be intelligible.

Stair, the guide to the Cave of the Winds.
manhood--large, well built, firm and pleasant in mouth and eye.
interest in the scene stirred up his, and made him communicative.

which he had accomplished some time previously, and which had brought
  'Can you lead
  He eyed me enquiringly, weighing,
whiskers, in such an undertaking.
of the fall as can be seen, and where you lead I will endeavour to
' His scrutiny relaxed into a smile, and he said, 'Very well;
'
On the morrow, accordingly, I came.
Biddle's Stair I stripped wholly, and re-dressed according to
woollen jackets, two pairs of socks, and a pair of felt shoes.
if wet, my guide assured me that the clothes would keep me from being
  A suit and hood of yellow oilcloth covered
  Most laudable precautions were taken by the young assistant who
immediately when severely tested.

the duty of an alpenstock.
we should go first to the Cave of the Winds, or to the Horseshoe,
 I decided on getting the
  They
  The base of the first portion of the cataract
ledge above.
these, but seeks out channels through which it pours torrentially.
passed some of these with wetted feet, but without difficulty.
length we came to the side of a more formidable current.
walked along its edge until he reached its least turbulent portion.
Halting, he said, 'This is our greatest difficulty; if we can cross
'
He waded in.

  He had to
rose violently.
successfully, and finally reached the shallower water at the other
  Stretching out his arm, he said to me, 'Now come on.
down the torrent, as it' rushed to the river below, which was seething
  De Saussure recommended the
the eye before they are encountered; and it is a wholesome custom in
before the mind, and to decide beforehand what ought to be done should
  Thus wound up in the present instance, I entered
  Even where it was not more than knee-deep, its power was
 As it rose around me, I sought to split the torrent by
to grasp my loins, twist me fairly round, and bring its impetus to
  Further struggle was impossible; and feeling my
quitted, and was instantly, as expected, swept into shallower water.

much stouter man, and, standing upright after my submersion, my legs
  My guide exhorted me to try
  Prudence was at my elbow, whispering dissuasion; but, taking
proceed.
the stream.
but, as it was, the tendency of the water to sweep it out of my hands
  I, however, clung to it by habit.
Again the torrent rose, and again I wavered; but, by keeping the left
hand of my leader at the other side.
  The
  'No traveller,' he said,
'  Soon afterwards, by trusting to a piece of
immediately caught by a protruding rock.

became so weighty as to cause us to stagger under its shock.
most part nothing could be seen; we were in the midst of bewildering
of innumerable whips.
the cataract.
upwards; but the defence was useless.
but at a certain place he halted, desiring me to take shelter in his
  The spray did not come so much from
struck the bottom.
blinding shock of the spray, while the line of vision to the upper
  On looking upwards over the
the Terrapin Tower loomed fitfully through the intermittent
  We were right under the tower.
cataract, after its first plunge, hit a protuberance some way down,
staggered.
stands, and moved, amid the wildest commotion, along the arm of the
the profound gorge of the Niagara River.

so, and could see, as before, the green gleam of the mighty curve
the spray between us and it alternately gathered and disappeared.
eminent friend of mine often speaks of the mistake of those physicians
remedies only.
  By
stimulate blood, brain, and viscera.
ladies' eyes enables my friend to thrive on dishes which would kill
  A sanative effect of the same order I experienced
  Quickened by the emotions
abolishing introspection, clearing the heart of all bitterness, and
most relentless and unreasonable foe.
value, and purely as a moral agent, the play was worth the candle.
companion knew no more of me than that I enjoyed the wildness of the
should like to see you attempting to describe all this.
thought it indescribable.
Conroy.

glimpses of the most impressive portions of the cataract.
under ledges formed by tabular masses of limestone, and through some
rocks.


he retorted that, as no traveller had ever thought of coming there, he
  He waded in.
struggle to keep himself erect was evident enough; he swayed, but
  At length he slipped, gave way,
the shallows.
arm towards me.
useful among the boulders.
made to reach him, and I proposed his seizing it.
he replied, 'that, in case of giving way, you can maintain your grasp,
'  Remarking that he might count on
  It was
  Thus helped, though its onset was
  All danger ended here.
afterwards roamed sociably among the torrents and boulders below the
  The rocks were covered with organic slime, which
effectually prevented slipping.
first by a wooden way carried over the boulders, and then along a
  When the
tranquilly from this spot; but when we were there, a blinding
  On the evening of the same
experiences of the morning, struck me as an imposture.

  Its effect upon
sharp angle of the rock, a sudden gust of wind met us, coming from
directly in our faces, with such force that in an instant we were wet
  When in the midst of this shower-bath the shock took away my
the conflict.
the worst part.
wild and disordered was my imagination that when I had reached half
' [Footnote: 'Mag.
 Hist,' 1830,
 121, 122.

below it, and long negotiations were necessary to secure the means of
  The only boat fit for the undertaking had been laid up for

  The main one was to secure oarsmen
be taken.
fellow, but only twenty, and therefore not sufficiently hardened, was
man who could do anything with the boat which strength and daring
  He came.
certainly indicated extraordinary firmness and power.
November 5, we started, each of us being clad in oilcloth.
oarsman at once assumed a tone of authority over his companion, and
  He
water.
directed outwards, not downwards.
the bow of the boat from being turned by them, was often very severe.

yielded noble views of the fall.
by indentations which exalt its beauty.
below the highest ledge, a secondary one juts out; the water strikes
 We
its base, the boulders over which Conroy and myself had scrambled a
  A rock was
over it.
outside of it.
  The
command and exhortation to the younger.
rock, the bow came obliquely to the surge; the boat was turned
  The
half-concealed rock and the boulders to the left.
in strongly through this channel.
but we made little way.
oarsman made a desperate attempt to get upon one of the boulders,
so violently against the rock, that the man flung himself back and

We returned along the base of the American Fall, running in and out

but it is a mere frill of adornment to its nobler neighbour the
  At times we took to the river, from the centre of which
  A streak of cloud
the green summit of the cataract shining above the smoke of spray
  Had Hennepin and La
would have been perfectly excusable.


the river, in summer, to the Canadian side.
suspension bridge for carriages and foot-passengers, and a mile or two
  Between ferry and bridge
bed steepens and the river quickens its motion.
narrows, and the rapidity and turbulence increase.
called the 'Whirlpool Rapids' I estimated the width of the river at
  When it
compressed into this space, the impetuosity of the river's rush may be
  Had it not been for Mr.
photographer of Niagara, I should have quitted the place without
spot, I have to thank him.
rapids, we descended, a little, I confess, to a climber's disgust, in

Two kinds of motion are here obviously active, a motion of translation
and the great waves generated by its collision with, and rebound from,
  In the middle of the river the rush and
individual waves is here most strikingly displayed.
heaps leap incessantly from the river, some of them with such energy
suspended in crowds of liquid spherules.
minutes.
the spray, carrying away the lighter drops, and leaving the heavier
  Wafted in the proper direction, rainbows appeared and
 In other directions the
was exquisitely beautiful.
further illustrated by the fact, that in some cases, as if by the
a particular centre, forming around it a kind of halo.

rapids is, that the central bed of the river is cumbered with large
water there, are due to its impact against these obstacles.
this explanation.
to be taken into account.
visibly cumber the sides of the river.
and sinks rhythmically but violently, large waves being thus produced.
On the generation of each wave, there is an immediate compounding of
  The ridges, which in still
disturbance, cross the river obliquely, and the result is that at the

river-motion; here we have the coalescence of waves with waves.
crest and furrow cross each other, the motion is annulled; where
where crest and crest aid each other, we have that astonishing leap of
shattered into the air.
is not so easily seen; but from the summit of the cliff the lateral
obvious.
the Whirlpool Rapids form one of the grandest illustrations of the
  The Nile 'cataract,' Mr.
me, offers more moderate examples of the same action.

whirlpool itself.
north-east, forming nearly a right angle with its previous direction.
The water strikes the concave bank with great force, and scoops it
  A vast basin has been thus formed, in which the
  Bodies and
days without finding the outlet.
above, this is curiously hidden.
whirlpool is obvious enough; and though you imagine the outlet must be
  Turning, however, round
view.

the scene presented itself as one of holy seclusion and beauty.
went down to the river's edge, where the weird loneliness seemed to
  The basin is enclosed by high and almost precipitous
  A kind of mystery
to some extent ignorant of the direction of its force.
that at certain points of the whirlpool, pine-trees are sucked down,
  The 'water is of the brightest
  The gorge through which it escapes is narrow, and the
  The surface is steeply
  There are no lateral waves,
depth is here too great to allow the inequality of the bed to ruffle
  Nothing can be more beautiful than this sloping liquid

The green colour is, I think, correctly accounted for in the last
  While crossing the Atlantic in 1872-73 I had frequent
  Looked properly
ascribe a trace of blue; at the most, a mere hint of indigo reaches
  The water, indeed, is practically black, and this is an
suspended matter.
to all kinds of light; but, as the thickness increases, the rays of

colours are absorbed, and such water ought to appear black, as no
  The approximation of the
purity.

and greener, and, before it disappears, it reaches a vivid blue-green.
Break such a pebble into fragments, each of these will behave like the
its modicum of green; and if the particles be so fine as to remain

  You go to bed with the black
  You rise in the morning, find it a vivid green,

suspension.
but it is not necessary.
rendering the particles too numerous and gross.
towards the close of my visit to Niagara.
storm in the upper lake-regions, and the quantity of suspended matter
Horseshoe.

the circumstances are favourable to the exhibition of the colour.
long as a wave remains unbroken no colour appears; but when the foam
cornice we often see a display of the most exquisite green.
metallic in its brilliancy.
production.
in all directions; the light which passes through the higher portion
matchless colour.
series of longitudinal protuberances and furrows which act like
light, and materially enhances its beauty.


of Niagara.
remarks upon erosion.
geologic change, and they are in a certain sense convertible.
feeble force acting through long periods, and an intense force acting
  To
 Hooker I have been indebted for some specimens of stones, the
 Hackworth on the shores
  They were described
 Travers in the 'Transactions of the New Zealand Institute.
Unacquainted with their origin, you would certainly ascribe their
  They resemble knives and spear-heads,
symmetry as if a tool, guided by human intelligence, had passed over
  But no human instrument has been brought to bear upon these
  They have been wrought into their present shape by the
  Two winds are, dominant here, and
every little particle of sand chipped away its infinitesimal bit of
 [Footnote:
occur in great abundance, and of various sizes, from half-an-inch to
  A large number were exhibited showing the
all with sharp cutting edges.

 Travers explained that, notwithstanding their artificial
wind-driven sand, as it passed to and fro over an exposed
  He gave a minute account of the manner in which the
erosive action thus indicated would have on railway and other works

'Dr.
table could not well be mistaken for artificial productions, still the
that if they were discovered associated with human works, there is no
period.
Society, February 9, 1869.


Mr.
fine sand blown against it.
hints which may be taken advantage of in art; and this action of sand
States.
friend, Mr.
 A
reservoir of compressed air, the pressure being variable at pleasure.
The hopper ended in a long slit, from which the sand was blown.
plate of glass was placed beneath this slit, and caused to pass slowly
glimmer, such as could only be produced by the most careful grinding.
Every little particle of sand urged against the glass, having all its
the depolished surface consisting of innumerable hollows of this

But this was not all.
and exposing others, figures and tracery of any required form could be
  The figures of open iron-work could be thus
pattern.
shelter the glass.
reproduced; the delicate filaments of the lace itself offering a
  All these effects have been obtained with a
  A fraction of
pattern.

destroy the local erosive power.
inconvenience, a sand-shower which would pulverise glass.
executed on glass with suitable kinds of ink are accurately worked out
 In fact, within certain limits, the harder the
effectual is the erosion.
the harder substance of the two; corundum, for example, is much harder
blow a hole through a plate of corundum.
by the impact of fine shot; the grains in this case bruising the
heat.

unrelated facts.
a cock which is fed by a pipe from a cistern at the top of the house,
  By
off is very sudden, the pipe, if not strong, may be burst by the
  By distributing the turning of the cock
entirely avoided.
energy in time.
energy in space.
the same principle.
intense; and the mechanical action, being moderate, must, to produce
  This concentration is
  Calc-spar will not
production of fire by collision.
total heat produced may be greater than with the hard ones, but, to

We can, however, go far beyond the mere depolishing of glass; indeed I

is the inventor of the sand-Blast.
if I may use the phrase, exerted by the industrial arts in the United
Mr.

frequently meeting in New York, is a most eminent example of the same
  At the end of the war, indeed, a million and a half of men were
life.
illustrations of his process.
has been worked out to a depth of three eighths of an inch.
plate, seven eighths of an inch thick, is entirely perforated.
circular plate of marble, nearly half an inch thick, open work of most
  It would
with the sand-blast it was accomplished in an hour.
strength of the blast; its delicacy is illustrated by this beautiful

This power of erosion, so strikingly displayed when sand is urged by
water.
matter carried along with it.
vortex, can wear away the hardest rock potholes' and deep cylindrical
  An extraordinary instance of this kind of
name.
  Such waterfalls
valley is without one or more transverse barriers of resisting
a cataract.
hard gneiss being there worn away to form a gorge, through which the
  The barrier of the Kirchet
  Behind it was a lake,
poured its excess of water.
part dissolved; but added to this we had the action of the sand and
chipped it away like the particles of the sand-Blast.
solution and mechanical erosion, the great chasm of the
  It is demonstrable that the water
level of their present edges, and tumbled down the lower faces of the
  Almost every valley in Switzerland furnishes examples of
resorted to in accounting for these gorges, being now for the most
  To produce the Canons of Western America, no other
infinitesimal.

  Soon after Europeans had taken possession
channel of the river Niagara below the falls had been excavated by the
  In Mr.
of this belief has been referred to.
Professor Joseph Henry in the 'Transactions of the Albany Institute:'
] 'In viewing the position of the
be impressed with the idea that this great natural raceway has been
the falls, beginning at Lewiston, have, in the course of ages, worn
' The same view is
 Hall, by M.
Professor Ramsay, indeed by most of those who have inspected the

A connected image of the origin and progress of the cataract is easily
  Walking northward from the village of Niagara Falls by the
narrow gorge, through which the Niagara flows.
this gorge are from 300 to 350 feet high.
trend to the north-east, and after a little time gradually resume our
  Finally, at about seven miles from the present
have been hitherto walking on table-land.
below us is a comparatively level plain, which stretches to Lake
  The declivity marks the end of the precipitous gorge of the
  Here the river escapes from its steep mural boundaries, and
its waters.

fall has sensibly receded, prompts the question, How far has this
creeps backwards begin its retrograde course?  To minds disciplined in
declivity which crossed the Niagara from Lewiston on the American to
  Over this transverse barrier the
here the work of erosion began.
of sufficient height to cause the river above it to submerge Goat
Charles Lyell, Mr.
island, the same fluviatile shells as are now found in the Niagara
  It would also account for those deposits along the
Ramsay to reduce to demonstration the popular belief that the Niagara

The physics of the problem of excavation, which I made clear to my
the present Horseshoe Fall.
of water bends over the very apex of the Horseshoe.
his excellent chapter on Niagara Falls, Mr.

shattered liquid; here the most powerful eddies recoil against the
  From this portion of the fall, indeed, the spray sometimes
gradually more attenuated, and passing finally through the condition
higher up.
river as the place of greatest mechanical energy, and from the centre
  The
necessary consequence of this action.
river the apex of the curve pushes its way backwards, cutting along
sides as it passes them.
the centre and drainage of the sides action was illustrated by a model
 John Cottrell.
discrepancy between the widths of the Niagara above and below the
  All along its course, from Lewiston Heights to its present
this is merely the expression of the greater depth, and consequently
  The gorge,
river varied, being narrowest where that depth was greatest.

strikingly into view when it and the American Fall are compared
  The American branch of the river is cut at a right angle by
  Here the Horseshoe Fall was the real
  It cut the rock, and formed the precipice, over which the
  But since its formation, the erosive action of
way for 600 yards across the end of Goat Island, and is now doubling

escaped the acute observation of Professor Ramsay.
words are: 'Where the body of water is small in the American Fall, the
that the Canadian Fall has receded from the north corner of Goat
'--Quarterly
]  The river bends; the
follow implicitly the direction of the deepest water in the upper
  The flexures of the gorge are determined by those of the
  Were the Niagara centre above the fall
  Once
examples of this action.
difficulty to the erosion theory, because of the sinuosity of the
  But, assuming the basalt to be of
formation of this sinuous channel, the present zigzag course of the
the sounding of the present river would enable us to predict the

But not only has the Niagara River cut the gorge; it has carried away
  The shale, being probably crumbled, is
  But at the base of the fall we find the huge
removed down the river.
which grapples with the boulders, has been regarded as the
  Probably it is so to some extent.
acts without ceasing on the abutting points of the boulders, thus

  That solid matter is
River and Lake Ontario, where the river enters it.
from 72 feet to 20 feet, in consequence of the deposition of solid
 [Footnote: Near
Admiralty Chart, is 180 feet; well within the gorge it is 132 feet.

in Mr.
' It is based on surveys executed
  Gibson and Evershed.
American Fall north of Goat Island marks the amount of erosion which
its way southward across the end of Goat Island to its present
  The American Fall is 168 feet high, a precipice cut down,
  The latter in 1842 was 159
excavate its gorge along the centre of the upper river.
of the Horseshoe, and T marks the site of the Terrapin Tower, with the
  Probably
assigned to it.

Niagara.
Lyell, namely, a foot a year, five thousand years or so will carry the
  As the gorge recedes it
thus leaving a nearly level terrace between Goat Island and the edge
  Higher up it will totally drain the American branch of
land.
precipice, forming a simple continuation of the cliffy boundary of the
  At the place occupied by the fall at this moment we
the consequence.
leave the verification of this prediction.
that if the causes now in action continue to act, it will prove itself

*****
Fig.

POSTSCRIPT.

of age, while engaged in painting one of the bridges which connect
bridge into the rapids, and was carried impetuously towards the
  He was urged against a rock which rose above the
  The
and ropes were brought, but there was none to use them.
of the excitement, a tall powerful young fellow was observed making
  He reached a rope; selected from
their hands.
point considerably above that to which the man clung, he plunged into
  He was carried violently downwards, but he caught the
  Newspapers from all
my guide Conroy.


  THE PARALLEL ROADS OF GLEN ROY.

Britain on June 9, 1876.

in the appendix to the third volume of Pennant's 'Tour in Scotland,' a
  'In the face of these hills,' says this
distances from each other and directly opposite on each side.
roads have been measured in the complete parts of them, and found to
  The two highest are
distance from the nearest to it.
the glen with the utmost regularity, nearly as exact as drawn with a
'
The correct heights of the three roads of Glen Roy are respectively
  Hence a vertical distance of
below the middle one.

drift which here covers the slopes of the mountains.
sensibly horizontal and therefore parallel.
reasonable the explanation of them given by the country people in his
  They thought that the roads 'were designed for the chase, and
wood, in order to tempt the animals into the open paths after they
who might conceal themselves in the woods above and below.

that impulse to which all scientific knowledge is due--the desire to
case of the parallel roads, with their weird appearance challenging
energetically felt.
that until the year 1817 no systematic description of them, and no
  In that year
 MacCulloch, who was then President of the Geological Society,
and pronounced to be the margins of lakes once embosomed in Glen Roy.
Why there should be three roads, or why the lakes should stand at

To Dr.
geologist, but obviously fitted by nature to grapple with her facts
  I refer to Sir Thomas
2nd of March, 1818, his paper on the Parallel Roads of Glen.
  In
is interesting to observe the differentiation of minds, and to single
from those who erred in it, or who learnedly occupied themselves with
  There is no man, in my opinion,
to it, this spirit of penetration, this force of scientific insight,
  Two distinct mental
  Firstly,
that higher mental process in which the constructive imagination comes
common cause, and weaving them into an organic whole.
these requirements did Sir Thomas Dick-Lauder fail.

which ran a single shelf, or terrace, formed obviously in the same
  The two shelves on the
Dick-Lauder wished to see whether, and how, they became united at the
  He followed the shelves into the recesses of the
  The bottom of the valley, as it rose, came ever nearer to
watershed, of precisely the same elevation as the road which swept

The correct height of this col is 1170 feet above the sea; that is to

From this col a lateral branch-valley--Glen Turrit--led down to Glen
  Our explorer descended from the col to the highest road of the
Gluoy.
height above the bottom of the valley; but this rose as he proceeded,
col, or watershed, looking into Glen Spey, and of precisely the same

He then dropped down to the lowest of these roads, and followed it
  Its elevation above the bottom of the
remained level while the valley sloped downwards.
lowest road doubling round the hills at the mouth of Glen Roy, and
  He

PARALLEL ROADS OF GLEN ROY.


The bottom of the Spean Valley, like the others, gradually rose, and

of the road, and beyond the head of this lake he found, as in the
level as the single road in Glen Spean, which, it will be remembered,

Here we have a series of facts of obvious significance as regards the
  The effort of the mind to form a coherent
cause the pictures of a stereoscope to coalesce.
exercise a certain strain, the object remaining vague and indistinct.
Suddenly its various parts seem to run together, the object starting
  Such, I take it, was the effect
  His
convinced that water only could have produced the terraces.
had the water been collected?  He saw clearly that, supposing the
the waters from the mountains flanking the glen were allowed to
which would gradually rise until it reached the level of the col at
  The rising would then cease; the superfluous
  As
enough, we should have in that glen a lake at the precise level of its
mountains, would form the shelf revealed by observation.

  But suppose the mouth of Glen Roy also
  Behind it also the water from the
  The surface of the lake thus formed
divides Glen Roy from Glen Spey.
cease; its superabundant water being poured over the col into the
  This state of things would continue as long as a
  The lake
road, would act, as in Glen Gluoy, upon the friable drift
terrace of Glen Roy.

of Glen Roy as to establish a connection between it and the upper part
to be blocked up.
occupied by a continuous lake, the level of which would obviously be
  The water in Glen
level of its new place of escape.
correspond exactly with the lowest parallel road, and it would form

In presence of the observed facts, this solution commends itself
  The question next occurs, What was
are at the present moment vast masses of detritus in certain portions
his barriers to have been formed.
detritus had been heaped up.
it was subsequently removed in the manner indicated, the single road
explained in a satisfactory manner.

Dick-Lauder invoked a new agency.
in the breaking down or waste of his dam, a halt occurred, the barrier
lake rising to the height of, and forming the second road.
of weakness was at once detected by Mr.
proving that the levels of the cols did not constitute an essential
  Though not destroyed,
and it became a point of capital importance, if the facts permitted,
  This was done in 1847 by Mr.
Milne, now Mr.
  On walking up Glen Roy from Roy Bridge, we
eastward from Glen Roy.
attract attention, or to suggest that it could have any conspicuous
  Hence, probably,
  But Mr.
Milne-Home entered this glen, on the northern side of which the middle
  The principal stream running
among hills too high to offer any outlet.
glen turns to the south-east; and, following up this branch, Mr.
Milne-Home reached a col, or watershed, of the precise level of the
  When the barrier blocking the glens had been so
the level of the second road.
thus formed, the surplus water of which would escape over the Glen
  The margin of this new lake, acting upon
  The theory of Sir
re-riveted by this new and unexpected discovery.

 Darwin, whose powerful mind swayed for a time

itself--that the parallel roads were formed by the sea; that this
were pauses in the process of upheaval, during which these glens
terraces were formed.
is it now maintained by Mr.
  It would not account for
  It would
from Glen Gluoy, where the mountain flanks are quite as impressionable
  It would not account for the absence of the shelves
have been clasped by the sea had the sea been there.
no doubt elsewhere, Mr.
here, as elsewhere, he has shown himself equal to that discipline of
moral strength.

the reasonableness, on the whole, of the views which he has founded on
  No such barriers of
behind them; but there is no trace left.
Glen Spean, but not where it is wanted.
roads stop abruptly at different points near the mouth of Glen Roy,
seen.
glaciers has swept the detritus away; but there have been no glaciers
  Professor
the entrance to Glen Trieg.
mound of detritus which, had a glacier followed the formation of the
  Taking all the circumstances into
incompetent to account for the present condition of Glen Gluoy and

Hypotheses in science, though apparently transcending experience, are
an ultra experiential region.
Dick-Lauder could not possibly have discerned the cause subsequently
  A knowledge of the action
explanation, and experience of this nature was not possessed by the
  The extension of Swiss glaciers
engineer named Venetz, who established, by the marks they had left
forsaken.
up with distinguished success by Charpentier, Studer, and others.
characteristic vigour Agassiz grappled with it, extending his
  He came to this
ancient glacier action.
proved to have once given birth to glaciers.
surveyed the surrounding neighbourhood, and pronounced, as a
and produced the parallel roads to have been barriers of ice.

and confirmation of this theory.

misjudged by those who, though accurate within a limited sphere, fail
investigation.
in that force and freshness of the scientific imagination which in
essential to the creator of knowledge.
art of the refiner, but the instinct of the discoverer, and the

precious metal which gives employment to the refiner, and without

Let us dwell for a moment upon this subject of ancient glaciers.
a flask containing water, in which a thermometer is immersed, is
  The water is heated, reaches a temperature of
  The rise of the thermometer then
water.
molecular work of vaporization.
steam passes from the flask through a tube into a second vessel kept
  Here it is condensed, and indeed congealed to
freeze the water.

  Though
  If we removed the lamp, there would be
  The mere
ice.
material--aqueous vapour--is, as we here see, the direct product of

It is now, I suppose, fifteen or sixteen years since I found myself
epoch which the researches of Agassiz and others had revealed.
profoundly thoughtful man maintained the fixed opinion that, at a
had suffered diminution, the glacial epoch being a consequence of this
  The celebrated French mathematician Poisson had another
  Astronomers have shown that the solar system moves through
scientific men.
system, during its motion, had traversed portions of space of
the colder regions of the universe, the glacial epoch occurred.
Notions such as these were more or less current everywhere not many
incomplete they were.
reduced, by the subsidence of solar heat, the cold of space, or any
  Four-and-twenty hours of such a
atmosphere.
  Such an
which the ice of glaciers is derived.
glaciers, is derived from aqueous vapour raised mainly from the
  The solar fire is as necessary a factor in

by the sun in the production of a glacier.
elsewhere shown, [Footnote: 'Heat a Mode of Motion,' fifth edition,
 vi: Forms of Water, sections 55 and 56.
cast iron five times the weight of the glacier not only to a white
  If, as I have already urged,
with white-hot metal, of quintuple the mass of the present glaciers,
solicit our explanation.
one of distillation, in which the fire of the sun, which generates the
condenses it.
the remark occurs that 'several writers have fallen into the strange
higher mean temperature than usual.
forgetfulness of the fact that without the heat the substance
]
It was their ascription to glacier action that first gave the parallel
self-instruction, I made a solitary pilgrimage to the place, and
  I traced
thanks to the civility of an Ordnance surveyor, I was enabled to
regarding the common level of the shelves at opposite sides of the
  As stated by Pennant, the width of the roads amounts
highest road ceases to have any width, for it runs along the face of a
portions of the rock being perfectly distinct to this hour.
knowledge of the region was, however, far from complete, and nine
thoroughly examined.
before venturing to talk to you about them.
1876 were to be devoted to this purpose; but at the last moment a

I resolved subsequently to make another effort to see the roads.
Accordingly last Thursday fortnight, after lecturing here, I packed
  Next day at noon
five-and-thirty miles brought us to the excellent hostelry of Mr.
Macintosh, at the mouth of Glen Roy.

wholly defeated us; but Nature was good-natured, and we had two
  Guided by the excellent
glen, and on reaching the stream called Allt Bhreac Achaidh faced the
 At the watershed between Glen Roy and Glen Fintaig
its road, which we persistently followed as long as it continued
  It is a feature of all the roads that they vanish before
them.
shallow, and incompetent on this account to raise wavelets of any
  A second reason is that they
south-westerly winds, the stillness of their waters causing them to
  From Glen
homewards, thus accomplishing two or three and twenty miles of rough

Next day we thoroughly explored Glen Glaster, following its two roads
  We reached the col discovered by Mr.
Milne-Home, which stands at the level of the middle road of Glen Roy.
Thence we crossed southwards over the mountain _Creag Dhubh_, and
of moraine matter which cumber the lower flanks of the mountain.
observations of Mr.
Glen Trieg, are in the highest degree interesting.
Spean, and continued a search begun on the evening of our arrival at


One of the proofs most convenient for reference, is a great rounded
three-quarters of a mile from Roy Bridge.
occur, and they leave no doubt upon the mind that Glen Spean was at
  To the disciplined eye the aspect
position can the observer more readily and thoroughly convince himself
  The dominant hills here are

But the great collecting ground of the glaciers which dammed the glens
Glen Spean.
  The
vapour-laden winds of the Atlantic, is a point of the first
  It is exactly similar to that of Carrantual and the
  These mountains
winds, and the precipitation, even at present, in the neighbourhood of
  The winds, robbed of their vapour, and
direction obliquely across Ireland; and the effect of the drying
with that at Portarlington.
 Lloyd, the ratio is as 59
Portarlington.
the consequence was a system of glaciers which have left traces and
Killarney Lakes.
which, descending from the Reeks, moved through the Black Valley, took
island emergent from the waters of the upper lake.
conspicuously glaciated.
traces of ancient glacier action.

adjacent mountains did, and continue to do, in Scotland.
example of this on the morning we quitted Roy Bridge.
westward rain fell copiously, and the roads were wet; but the
dry.
while at Laggan it is only 46 inches annually.
west and east is forcibly brought out by observations at the two ends
  Fort William at the south-western end has,
has only 24.
meteorologist, Mr.
the most interesting and valuable kind.

restore in idea the process by which the glaciers of Lochaber were
  When the cold of the glacial
acting with sufficient power upon the tropical ocean, the vapours
converted into snow.
valley, strath, and corry, south of Glen Spean, glaciers were poured
  The two great factors here brought into play are the
consumption in the milder air below.
consumption, and the ice extended, filling Glen Spean to an
north of that glen.
south of Glen Spean be receptacles of ice at a time when those north
position and the greater elevation of the mountains south of Glen
  They first received the loads of moisture carried by the
warmed by the liberation of their latent heat, did these winds touch

An instructive observation bearing upon this point is here to be
  Had our visit been in the winter we should have found all the
snow all gone.
mountains north and south of Glen Spean exhibited their relative
  Scanning the former hills from many points
swaths and patches loaded the latter.
return, the relation indicated by this observation would cause Glen
valleys on the north, visited by warmer and drier winds, would remain
  This flow from the south would be
the consumption the glaciers would extend, the dams which closed the
  By-and-by supply and consumption becoming
constant.
excess, a lowering of the barriers and a retreat of the ice being the
  But for a long time the conflict between supply and
of the barriers, and keeping the imprisoned lakes in the northern
  But however slow its retreat, the ice in the long run would be
  The dam at the mouth of Glen Roy, which probably
gradually retreat.
subsidence of the lake eighty feet, from the level of the highest to
  I
that Glen Glaster may have been blocked by a glacier from Glen Trieg.
The ice dam continuing to retreat, at length permitted Glen Roy to
  A continuous lake then filled
by the col at Makul, above the head of Loch Laggan.
was the portion of the glacier which derived nutrition from Ben Nevis,

courses which they pursue to-day.

gradual melting of the dam would produce the entire series of
  In sinking from col to col the water would flow over a
remaining sufficiently long at any particular level to produce a shelf
  By temporary halts in the process
dam itself, or through local softness in the drift, small
observers, are seen upon the flanks of the glens to-day.

glens to a height, it may be, of 1,500 feet above the bottom of Glen
fact, insisted on by Professor Geikie, that barriers of detritus would
there; in presence of the fact that great glaciers once most certainly

ascribes the parallel roads to lakes dammed by barriers of ice has, in
practical demonstration of its truth.

  Mr.
and Mr.
deal with true causes.
descending drift arrested by the water, and in part to the fretting of
belts of contact of lake and bill.
been frequent when the drift was unbound by the rootlets which hold it
  In some cases, it may be remarked, the visibility of
  The
above and below them, while on heather-covered hills the absence of

The annexed sketch of a model will enable the reader to grasp the
  Glen Gluoy and
  Let us
of 1,500 feet above the sea, the ice not filling the upper part of
  The ice would thrust itself for some distance up the
  The streams from the
that glen, forming a lake, the level of which would be determined by
  Over this col
  But in Glen Roy it could not rise
flow into Glen Spey.

the single road in Glen Gluoy and the highest road in Glen Roy.
state of things would continue as long as the ice dam was sufficiently
climate the gradually sinking dam reached, in succession, the levels
of over the cols.
until a connection was established between Glen Roy and Glen Glaster,
would be determined by that of the col c, over which the water would
  During this period the
formed.
eventually be established between Glen Roy, Glen Glaster, and the
  A common lake would fill all three glens,
indefinite period the lake would pour its water.
the lowest Glen Roy road, which is common also to Glen Glaster and
  Finally, on the disappearance of the ice
respective valleys as they do to-day.

  7
Reviewing our work, we find three considerable steps to have marked
  The
pregnant conception of Agassiz regarding glacier action, and the third
thorough researches of Mr.
  No circumstance or incident
recognition of the value of these researches.
throughout by unflagging industry, by novelty and acuteness of
  These
of Ben Nevis and his colleagues to the vapour-laden winds of the
 Jamieson.
exploration of Lochaber, and the development of the theory of the

Thus ends our rapid survey of this brief episode in the physical
with the immeasurable lapses of time through which, to produce its
  In the
into account--the widening of the intellectual horizon and the

At first, as in the case of ancient glaciers, through sheer want of
  But by degrees
intellectual powers, that where truth once could not find an entrance
 [Footnote: The formation, connection,
Lochaber were illustrated in the discourse here reported by the model

  Glen Gluoy with its lake and road and the cataract
cataracts at the head of Glen Spey, Glen Glaster, and Glen Spean, were
  The successive shiftings of the barriers, which were
corresponding road into view, while the entire removal of the barriers
down the real glens of to-day.

annexed.


THOMAS PENNANT.
  Vol.
 1776, p.
 JOHN
--On the Parallel Roads of Glen Roy.
 Soc.

 iv.
 314.

)--On the
  Edin.
 Soc.
 1818, vol.

 1.

--Observations on the Parallel Roads of Glen Roy, and
that they are of marine origin.
 Trans.
 cxxix.
 39.

--Elements of Geology.

Louis AGASSIZ.
Terraces.
 New Phil.
 xxxiii.
 236.

--On the Parallel Roads of
Land in Scotland, and on the Detrital Deposits in that Country.

 Soc.
 1847, vol.
 p.

ROBERT CHAMBERS.
  Edinburgh, 1848.

 D.
--On the Parallel Roads of Glen Roy.

 iii.
 341.

 JAMIESON.
Place in the History of the Glacial Period.
 Journal Geol.
Soc.
 xix.
 235.

--Antiquity of Man.
 253.

 R.
 WATSON.
Roy.
 Journ.
 Soc.
 xxii.
 9.

--On the Parallel Roads of Glen Roy.
 Journ.
Geol.
 1867, vol.
 p.

CHARLES BABBAGE.

 Journ.
 Soc.
 xxiv.
 273.

--On the Origin of the Parallel Roads of Glen Roy.

 Soc.
 xxv.
 282.

--How the Parallel Roads of Glen Roy were formed.

 Soc.
 xxviii.
 237.

E.
Lochaber.
 1874.


  ALPINE SCULPTURE.


TO account for the conformation of the Alps, two hypotheses have been
and the hypothesis of erosion.
which the mountains were elevated produced fissures in the earth's
fissures; while the latter maintains that the valleys have been cut
residual forms of this grand sculpture.
cited as a conspicuous illustration of the fissure theory--the
flows, could, it was alleged, be nothing else than a crack in the
 To the Via Mala I therefore went in 1864 to instruct

The gorge commences about a quarter of an hour above Tusis; and, on
fissure.
  Some
of rolled stones, evidently rounded by water-action.
up, and just before reaching the first bridge which spans the chasm, I
  Through
which exhibited a section showing perfect stratification.
no agency in the place to roll these stones, and to deposit these
some hundreds of feet below them.
history the river must have run at this high level.
of water-action soon revealed themselves.
first bridge I could see the solid rock 200 feet above the bed of the

It is stated in the guide-books that the river, which usually runs
violent thunder-storms; and it may be urged that the marks of erosion
floods.
such floods is not well authenticated, and that if the supposition
power of the river.
thus erode the rock, the same agency, acting without ceasing upon the

I proceeded upwards, and from a point near another bridge (which of
  The
narrow that it might be leaped across.
crack is the impression first produced; but a brief inspection
  From top to
  This cleft was best
upwards from the bridge itself, the evidence of aqueous erosion was

The character of the erosion depends upon the rock as well as upon the
  The action of water upon some rocks is almost purely
masses.
with carbonate of lime without damage to its transparency; the rock is
often resemble those cut in the ice of glaciers by glacier streams.
the solubility of limestone is probably to be ascribed the fantastic
and caverns which interpenetrate limestone formations.
of being thus dissolved will expose a smooth surface after the water
the surfaces and the curved hollows scooped in the sides of the gorge,

About four miles from Tusis, and not far from the little village of
  It
an ancient lake; and a farmer, who was my temporary companion,
neighbourhood.
his attention to the rolled stones, which rest not only above the
been there to have rolled those stones, he saw the force of the
  In fact, in former times, and subsequent to the
this place, damming the river which came from the mountains higher up.
A lake was thus formed which poured its waters over the barrier.
actions were here at work, both tending to obliterate the lake--the
its dam by the river.
Via Mala; the lake was drained, and the river now flows in a definite

From Tusis I crossed to Tiefenkasten by the Schien Pass, and thence
  There are three or four ancient
  They are
with a barrier in front through which the river has cut a passage, the
  These lakes were
ancient glaciers.

twenty minutes below the end of the Rosegg glacier, and about an hour
  The valley here is crossed by a pine-covered moraine
called a mountain.
point on the Surlei slopes above it will convince any person
  Where, moreover, the interior of the
the ice, with boulders entangled in it.
valley, and at one time dammed the river up.
cut through, the stream having about one-fourth of the moraine to its
  Other moraines of
present day.

Pisciadello, there is a moraine composed of large boulders, which
in cascades.
retreat of the ancient glacier which formed the moraine.
moraine is a lake-bed, now converted into a level meadow, which rests

At Pontresina a very fine and instructive gorge is to be seen.
river from the Morteratsch glacier rushes through a deep and narrow
  The rock is
features of water-action are perfectly evident from top to bottom.
Those features are in part visible from the bridge, but still better
upper village of Pontresina.
eddies of the water is here quite manifest.
upwards brings us to the end of the gorge; and behind it we have the
origin.
revealed.
ridge of comparatively resisting material crossed the valley at this
  Over the lowest part of this ridge the river flowed, rushing
issued from the Rosegg glacier.
powerful eroding agent, and finally cut the channel to its present

Geological writers of reputation assume at this place the existence of
gorge.
existence of this fissure; and it is certain that water, particularly
through unfissured rock.
where the clean bed of the stream is exposed, the rock which forms the
  An example of
hours from Pontresina.
streams from the Bernina Pass and the Heuthal the river flows through
  At some places
bare, but shows no trace of fissure.
I may use the term, to cut through rock is demonstrated by such
  But if water be competent to form a gorge without the aid
that at Pontresina?  It seems far more philosophical to accept the
the agent which produced them.

identical in kind, of barriers which crossed valleys and formed lakes
consequence.
Finsteraarschlucht in the valley of Hash.
Kirchet seems split across, and the river Aar rushes through the
  Behind the barrier we have the meadows and pastures of Imhof
  Were this an isolated
Finsteraarschlucht was produced by an earthquake, as some suppose it
which are frequent in the Alps--when probably a hundred cases of the
quite unphilosophical to assume that in each particular case an
  As in the case
Aar glacier, dammed the waters flowing from it, thus forming a lake,
  Over this
passed, its bed ever deeper, until finally it became deep enough to
the river now flows in a definite channel.

 The
and I wished to see whether any evidences existed of aqueous erosion.
Near the summit of the Kirchet is a signboard inviting the traveller
the very bottom of the principal one.
chasm from bottom to top proves to demonstration that water had in
  It is scooped, rounded, and polished,
of erosion.
instruction was needed, and from its edge nothing to satisfy me could
  I therefore stripped and waded into the river until a point
gorge.
  Below me on the
and caused the Aar to swerve from its direct course.
bottom this cliff was polished, rounded, and scooped.
room for doubt.
above.
of the Kirchet.

that the valleys themselves follow the tracks of primeval fissures
referred to being in reality portions of the great cracks which formed
  Such an argument, however, would virtually concede the
  The narrow
even narrower, frequently occur at the bottom of broad valleys.
fissures might enter into the list of accidents which gave direction
formation of the valley, as it now exists, could no more be ascribed
the finger of the engineer which turns on the steam.

strata; and the effects which the merest driblet of water can produce
  It is not uncommon to meet chasms
dry for a large portion of the year.
gorges such secondary chasms are often found.
I think, be more and more included in our reasonings on these
  Happily, the marks which the rivers have, in most cases,
of yesterday, give us ground and courage to conceive what may be
  Thus the modern portion of the Via Mala
  Near Bergün, in the valley of the
than the great one.
gorge, and to the very edges of the gorge we have the evidences of
  But the most striking illustration of water-action upon
  Here
and bottom.
downwards, towards the sky or towards the river, he meets everywhere
has been sawn through the mountain by the waters of the Tamina.

formed by the cutting through of the rock-barriers which frequently
they are the work of erosion.
To what action are we to ascribe the formation of the valleys
mountain-ridges, for were the valleys wholly filled, the ridges would
  Possibly no answer can be given to this question which is
  Special localities might
the conformation of the Alps to the operation of a single cause.

to bring the question of their origin within the sphere of close
  That they were in whole or in part once beneath the sea
sedimentary rocks which required a sea to form them.
elevation above the sea is due to one of those local changes in the
geologic time, in some cases depressing the land, and in others
  Considering
could hardly have been pushed out without dislocation and fracture;
foldings, contortions, and even reversals in position of the strata in
  Such changes in the position of beds which

advocates of the fracture theory contend, mark the positions of the

Imagination is necessary to the man of science, and we could not
a picture of the earth's crust cracked and fissured by the forces
  Imagination, however, must be strictly
  That fractures occurred cannot,
is a conclusion not at all involved in the admission of dislocations.
I never met with a precise statement of the manner in which the
acted--whether they assume a general elevation of the region, or a
subsidences after a general elevation, or whether they would superpose

In the absence of any distinct statement, I will assume the elevation
sufficient to place the most prominent portions of the protuberance
  To fix the ideas, let us consider a
let us suppose, in the first instance, the circumference of this
space within it.
strain; and, if it were inflexible, the strain must be relieved by
  Crevasses would thus intersect the crust.
enquire what proportion the area of these open fissures is likely to
 An approximate answer is all
render minute precision unnecessary.

one-hundredth the area of the land.
upon a single line drawn over the summit of the protuberance from a
  Regarding the protuberance as a
100 miles and a versed sine of 3 miles is 100.
the surface to reach its new position must stretch 0.
be broken.
would relieve the strain; that is to say, the sum of the widths of all
  If,
lines of tension, we compared their areas with the area of the

ratio the area of the open fissures must bear to the unfissured crust.
They enable us to say, for example, that to assume the area of the
absurd, while that the area of the fissures could be one-half or more
unthinkable.
or subsidence of the land all round our assumed circle, we arrive
altogether insignificant as compared with that of the unfissured

To those who have seen them from a commanding elevation, it is
to the picture which this theory presents to us.
cracks with approximately vertical walls, we have ridges running into
  Instead of a fissured
ocean when agitated by a storm.
narrower than the ridges, occupy the greater space.
the Alps turned upside down, so as to invert the elevations and
narrower valleys between them, than the present ones.
that exist cannot, I think, with any correctness of language be called
  It may be urged that they originated in fissures: but even
the subordinate part of giving direction to the agents which are to be

The fracture theory, then, if it regards the elevation of the Alps as
is, in my opinion, utterly incompetent to account for the conformation
  If, on the other hand, we are compelled to resort to
obtain the valleys and the mountains will, I imagine, bring the
  Indeed an
eminences--from the Galenstock, the Grauhaupt, the Pitz Languard, the
Jungfrau, the Finsteraarhorn, the Weisshorn, or the Matterhorn, where
which really made this region what it is are alone brought into
inability of any fracture theory to account for the present

A correct model of the mountains, with an unexaggerated vertical
of the highest peaks.
which, though insignificant in view of the general question of Alpine
impressive.
on the scale of a model they are too small to be visible; while the

A minute analysis of the phenomena strengthens the conviction which
  We find, for
think of ascribing to any other agency than erosion.
their genesis and history is as certain as that erosion produced the
  From these indubitable cases of
down the flanks of the ridges, with their little working navigators at
largest valleys of the Alps; and it would perplex the plutonist to fix

In ascending one of the larger valleys, we enter it where it is wide
  The flanking
reach a place where the depth of the valley is a maximum.
our walk upwards, we find ourselves flanked by gentler slopes, and
depression in the chain of mountains.
the large valleys.
slope of the chain, and through the same series of appearances in the
  If the valleys on both sides of the col were produced
the col?  The case here cited is representative; and I am not
cracked in the manner indicated.
many of which the unfissured rock can be traced from side to side.

from the theory of erosion.
great power as an erosive agent, it must collect in sufficient mass.
On the higher slopes and plateaus--in the region of cols--the power is
carried on with increased vigour, and the excavation gradually reaches
  Lower still the elevations diminish and the slopes become
eroding agent quits the mountains altogether, and the grand effects
disappear.

question of the erosion theory as compared with the fracture theory;
the subject leads me to adopt the former.
include the action of water, of ice, and of the atmosphere, including
  Water and ice, however, are the principal agents, and
impossible to say.
Conformation of the Alps,' [Footnote: Phil.
 vol.
 p.
in which I ascribed the paramount influence to glaciers.
which that opinion was founded are, I think, unassailable; but whether
confess, an open question.

are not convincing.
daring to some minds that its boldness alone is deemed its sufficient
  It is, however, to be remembered that a precisely similar
ancient glacier extension was first mooted.
too hardy to be entertained; and the evidences of glacial action were
the true one.
that discussion beware lest they place themselves, with reference to
their opponents.

compared to the giants of the glacial epoch--we find that from every
matter which the ice has rubbed from the rocks.
soft, the amount of this finely pulverised matter suspended in the
  The water, for example, of the river which flows
  The Rhine is charged
to abolish it for a large fraction of its length.
charged with it, and tens of thousands of acres of cultivable land are

In the case of every glacier we have two agents at work--the ice
weight, and either rasping this point into powder or tearing it bodily
circulates upon the bed of the glacier continually washes the detritus
  Confining the
allowing them sufficient time to act, it is not a matter of opinion,
  But the
  Rocks are not homogeneous; they are
virtually detached masses.
such masses bodily away.
the subject proves the competence of a glacier to deepen its bed.
Taking the case of a glacier 1,000 feet deep (and some of the older
ice to an atmosphere, we find that on every square inch of its bed
yard of its bed with a weight of 486,000 lbs.
of this amount the glacier is urged down its valley by the pressure
  We can hardly, I think, deny to such a tool a power of

The retardation of a glacier by its bed has been referred to as
is in some measure an expression of the magnitude of the erosive
  Either the bed must give way, or the ice must slide over
  We get indeed some idea of the crushing pressure which the
resistance, and the effort to overcome it, are such as to make the
only of the total motion being due to the progress of the entire mass

The sudden bend in the valley of the Rhone at Martigny has also been
  'Why,'
forward instead of making this awkward bend?' But if the valley be a
least as much reason to prolong itself in a straight line as the
  A statement of Sir John Herschel with reference to
has a tendency to run--for this plain reason, that at its momentary
on the molecules there situated is counteracted only by half of the
  the cohesion
  Roy.
' vol.

 678).
theory must assume the existence of some accident which turned the
adherent of the erosion theory to make a similar assumption.

beautifully illustrated in glacier streams, which are made to cut
trivial character.
Switzerland,' M.
Sargans in proof that the river must there follow a pre-existing
  I made a special expedition to the place in 1864; and though
 Studer had good grounds for the selection of this
a fissure.

Alpine Club, M.
last year at Samaden visited the end of the Morteratsch glacier, and
imbed itself in the soil.
glacier erosion, as applied either to lakes or valleys, is to be
  Let me record here my experience of the

I took with me in 1864 a theodolite to Pontresina, and while there had
 Hirst, who in 1857
  We
crossed the ice-stream near the well-known hut of the painter Georgei,
other below it.
the glacier at the hut B, and the lowest line C, the following are the
which extended over several days.
fixed, which are designated by the figures 1, 2, 3, &c.
Tables.


No.
    Hourly Motion.

35 inch.

49 inch.

53 inch.

54 inch.

56 inch.

54 inch.

52 inch.

49 inch.

40 inch.

29 inch.

20 inch.

the sides of the glacier is manifest: the centre moves with the

Morteratsch Glacier, Line B.

  of Stake.

1                 0.

2                 0.

3                 0.

4                 0.

5                 0-41 inch.

44 inch.

44 inch.

45 inch.

43 inch.

44 inch.

44 inch.

glacier, and the ice was thin at the place, hence its slow motion.
Crevasses prevented us from carrying the line sufficiently far across
evident.


No.

1                 0.

2                 0.

3                 0.

4                 0.

5                 0.

6                 0.

7                 0.

8                 0.

9                 0.

10                0.

11                0.

Comparing the three lines together, it will be observed that the
  In 100 hours the


Line A            56 inches
Line B            45 inches.


This deportment explains an appearance which must strike every
the new Bernina Road.
commencing as a narrow streak, but towards the end the moraine
of the glacier.
measurements, which prove that a stone on the moraine where it is
it is crossed by the line C with a velocity of twenty-six inches per
  The moraine is in a state of longitudinal
  Its materials are more and more squeezed together, and
terminal portion of the glacier wider than above.


hours, or seven inches a day--a very slow motion; and had we run a
slower still.
 [Footnote:
inches, while a mile or so above the snout the velocity is eighteen
  The spreading out of the moraine is here very striking.
I submit that this is not the Place to seek for the scooping power of
  The opinion appears to be prevalent that it is the snout
certainly an erroneous opinion.
most where the weight and the motion are greatest.
often rests upon matter which has been scooped from the glacier's bed
  I therefore do not think that the inspection of what the

The snout of a glacier is potent to remove anything against which it
motion, manifests itself at the end of the Morteratsch glacier.
hillock, bearing pine-trees, was in front of the glacier when Mr.
Hirst and myself inspected its end; and this hillock is being bodily
  Several of the trees are
advance, the mound will certainly be ploughed away.

in the first place, great valleys, such as those of the Rhine and the

valleys running into the main ones, and which may be called valleys of
  When these latter are examined, smaller valleys are
order.
may be called valleys of the fourth order, and so on until we reach
all.
magnitude as the order of the valley ascends, carving the earth and
  We find that the larger
dimensions, always moving, grinding down and tearing away the rocks
  We have, moreover, on the plains at the feet
from the sculpture of the mountains themselves.

Alps.
unknown depths with the materials derived from the higher ones.
the vast quantities of moraine-matter which cumber many even of the
erosion which has taken place.
only in small part have been derived from the falling of rocks upon
the ploughing-out of the glacier itself.
magnitude of many of the ancient moraines, which date from a period
when, consequently, the quantity of moraine-matter derived from the

The erosion theory ascribes the formation of Alpine valleys to the
  It invokes nothing but true
  Its artificers are still there, though, it may be, in
demonstrable that they are competent to produce the effects ascribed
  And what does the fracture theory offer in comparison?  From
the slopes and forms of the mountains.
be invoked, and its power therefore conceded.
infers from the disturbances of the Alps the existence of fissures;
  But that they were of a magnitude
followed, as the Alpine valleys do, the lines of natural drainage of
either by reason or by observation.

implied by the theory of erosion almost superior to that involved in
  Think of the ages which must have been
  The question
  Think of the ages which the molten
  But these vaster epochs lack
  They bewilder us, but
  The genesis of the mountains
operation is enhanced by our partial ability to conceive it.
falling of a rock from a mountain-head, in the shoot of an avalanche,
illustrations of the power of gravity than in the motions of the
  When the intellect has to intervene, and calculation is
feelings ceases to be proportional to the magnitude of the phenomena.


glacier: the line was staked out across the trunk formed by the
distance below the rocky promontory called Agaliogs.


No.
    Hourly Motion.

01 inch.

05
3                 0.

10
5                 0.

13
7                 0.

18
9                 0.

23
11                0.

amounts to seven inches a day.
the line quite across the glacier.


 RECENT EXPERIMENTS ON FOG-SIGNALS.

1878.

people, and one of the sailor's greatest dangers is his proximity to
  Hence, the idea of warning him of such proximity
towers built expressly for the purpose.
example, stands an ancient Pharos of this description.

reinforced by parabolic reflectors poured their light upon the sea.
Several of these lamps were sometimes grouped together so as to
emanated from a single source.
still to some extent employed in our lighthouse-service, but for a
devised by the illustrious Frenchman, Fresnel.

with several concentric wicks, the flame of which, being kindled by a
  In fixed lights the
form a luminous sheet which grazes the sea-horizon.
lights the lenses gather up the rays into distinct beams, resembling
the mariner in succession.

light is intended, for here it is not needed.
foggy weather, for here it is ineffectual.
intermediate stages of hazy, snowy, or rainy weather, in which a

 Douglass, the
raised the number of the wicks to six, which produce a very noble
  To Mr.
application of gas to lighthouse illumination.
his power varies from 28 jets to 108 jets, while in the lighthouse of
maximum number of jets being 324.
only in case of fog, the 28-jet burner being amply sufficient for
  The passage from the small burner to the large, and
certainty.
Board of Trade has exercised a wise liberality in allowing every
 Wigham for the development of his invention.

electricity.
Faraday proved the existence and illustrated the laws of those induced

  'I
facts and new relations dependent on magneto-electric induction than
the latter would find their full development hereafter.
of Holmes, of the Paris Alliance Company, of Wilde, and of Gramme,

But, as regards the augmentation of power, the greatest step hitherto
 Werner Siemens and
  Through the application of their discovery a
process of accumulation at compound interest, be caused so to enrich
machines into the shade.
machine placed downstairs, and worked there by a minute steam-engine.
It is a light of about 1000 candles; and for it, and for the
liberality of Dr.
presented the machine to this Institution.
at the South Foreland, machines on the principle of Siemens, but of
Elder Brethren of the Trinity House for the two light-houses at the

Our most intense lights, including the six-wick lamp, the Wigham
in heavy weather, may be regarded, in a certain sense, as fog-signals.
But fog, when thick, is intractable to light.
penetrate it, much less any terrestrial source of illumination.
the necessity of employing sound-signals in dense fogs.
horns, whistles, guns, and syrens have been used for this purpose; but
to deal.
Stack, near Holyhead, on the Kish Bank near Dublin, at Lundy Island,
  During the long, laborious, and I
auspices of the Elder Brethren of the Trinity House at the South
5-inch
 of powder, yielded a louder report than a long
  Here was a hint to be acted on by
  The effectiveness of the sound depended on the
we had hit accidentally upon the best possible shape, arrangements
calculated to produce the loudest sound attainable from the combustion
 of powder.
sound, the gun was furnished with a parabolic muzzle, intended to
  The
experiments executed at Woolwich with small models, provided with
  A drawing of the gun is annexed (p.

chambers being loaded and brought in rapid succession into the firing
  The performance of the gun proved the correctness of the

An incidental point of some interest was decided by the earliest
  It had been a widely spread opinion among
  I
dated 22nd April, 1874, I ventured to express myself thus: 'The
two factors--the sound due to the shock of the air by the violently
which, to some extent, rings like a bell.
will disappear at considerable distances.

  8.
Major Maitland, R.
 Assistant Superintendent.
of this gun has been modified in construction since this drawing was
]
The result of subsequent trial, as reported by General Campbell, is,
of cast iron at short distances, but that the advantage lies with the
' [Footnote: General Campbell assigns a
  The ring of the bronze gun represents

of the cast-iron gun at a distance beyond question.

thought of as a probably effective sound-producer.
indeed, theoretic considerations caused me to fix my attention

energy are demonstrated, seemed to single it out as a substance
production of an intense wave of sound.
shall now more particularly enquire, calling to our aid a brief but
'Philosophical Magazine' for 1868.

conversion of a solid body into an intensely heated gas.
which the artillerist requires the expanding gas to perform is the
air in front of the projectile, which is backed by the whole pressure
  Such, however, is not the work that we want our
  We wish to transmute its energy not into the
motion.
to vast distances through the atmosphere, and this requires a certain

A sound-wave consists essentially of two parts--a condensation and a
  Now air is a very mobile fluid, and if the shock
 Consider
which might be expected to generate corresponding pulses in the air.
When, for example, the bob moves to the right, the air to the right of
supposed to follow the bob.
the kind.
and those behind it close so rapidly in, that no sound-pulse is
  The mobility of hydrogen, moreover, being far greater than
sonorous waves in hydrogen than in air.
readjustment, this refusal, so to speak, to allow its atoms to be
admirable penetration, refers the damping power, first described by

A tuning-fork which executes 256 complete vibrations in a second, if
note.
to.
air between the incipient condensations and rarefactions, whereby the
  Stokes, however, has taught
close proximity to one of the corners of the fork.
augmentation of the sound of the fork is the consequence.

fractional part of the energy of the shock converted into wave motion.
And as different kinds of gunpowder vary considerably in their
producers of sound.
by experiment.
Woolwich on the 4th of June, 1875, the sound-producing powers of four
  In the order of the size
(F.
), Large-grain (L.
), Rifle Large-grain (R.
G.
Pebble-powder (P.
) The charge in each case
5 lbs.
 howitzers being employed to fire the

FIG.

There were eleven observers, all of whom, without a single
all.
came next; seven also of the eleven placed the rifle large-grain third
pebble-powder the worst sound-producer.
entirely due to differences in the rapidity of combustion.
have witnessed the performance of the 80-ton gun must have been
  To avoid the strain
lumps far larger than those of the pebble-powder above referred to.
the long tube of the gun these lumps of solid matter gradually resolve
push to the air, instead of the sharp shock necessary to form the

These are some of the physical reasons why guncotton might be regarded
  Firing it as we have been taught to do by
 Abel, its explosion is more rapid than that of gunpowder.
case the air particles, alert as they are, will not, it might be
rapidity sufficient to forestall the formation of the wave.
priori_ grounds then, we are entitled to infer the effectiveness of
stretching from 1874 to the present time, this inference has been

As regards explosive material, and zealous and accomplished help in
placed at the disposal of the Elder Brethren.
General Younghusband, Colonel Fraser, Colonel Maitland, and other
in most cases have incurred the labour of reducing and reporting on
  Guns of various forms and sizes have been invoked
foci of parabolic reflectors.

for the purpose--some with plain, some with conical, and some with
 of fine-grain powder, were pitted
 of gun-cotton detonated both in the open, and in the
 [Footnote: For charges of this
fear of fracture.

unanimously pronounced loudest of all.
gun-cotton detonated in free air was placed second in intensity.
Though the same charge was used throughout, the guns differed notably
with or without the reflector.
different distance on the same day, confirmed to the letter the

As a practical point, however, the comparative cost of gun-cotton and
ought not to be stretched too far in cases involving the safety of
  In the earlier experiments, where quantities of equal
fluctuating.
required some preliminary discipline--promptness, certainty, and
  As 1 lb.
of gun-cotton costs as much as 3 lbs.
were compared together on the 22nd of February.
discharge the gunpowder were a 12-lb.

Foreland.
 howitzer, firing 3 lbs.
gunpowder, had a slight advantage over 1 lb.
in the open; while the 12-lb.
beaten by the gun-cotton.
gun-cotton is reported as having been beaten by all the guns.

fog-signalling, was pushed rapidly forward, and on March 22 and 23,
  Pitted against it were a
5-inch howitzer, 1.
  of gun-cotton detonated in
5 lb.
gun-cotton detonated in free air.
series of experiments were made, when the new experimental gun, firing
  charge, demonstrated its superiority over all guns previously
  As regards the comparative merits
new gun, the mean values of their sounds were the same.
focus of the reflector, the gun-cotton clearly dominated over all the
 [Footnote: The reflector was fractured by the
]
FIG.

Gun-cotton Slab (1.
) Detonated in the Focus of a Cast-iron

The whole of the observations here referred to were embraced by an
other side of the line of fire.
observers on board the 'Galatea,' which took up positions varying from
5 miles from the firing-point.
observations, the reinforcing action of the reflector, and of the
  But the reinforcement of
direction, and accordingly it was found that at a distance of 5.
miles from the firing-point, and on a line including nearly an angle
gun; while behind the station, at distances of 8.
5
the gun-cotton in the reflector.
important by the fact that the sound reached the Mucking Light, a
5 miles, against a light wind which was blowing at the

Most, if not all, of our ordinary sound-producers send forth waves
  A trumpet is loudest
  The same is true of a gun.
with its mouth pointed upwards or downwards, sends forth waves which
at an angular distance of 90° from that plane.
must have been aware of the fact that the sides of the bell, and not
determined by this knowledge.
of different densities in different parts.
experiments at Shoeburyness that when the broad side of a slab was
the wire was cut by the explosion, while when the edge of the slab was

To the circumstance that the broadsides of the slabs faced the sea is
in two directions, not far removed from the line of fire, the
gun.

of the exploding mass would affect the constitution of the wave of
  I did not think large rectangular slabs the most favourable
different sizes, and pitting them against each other The differences
quantities of explosive material might lead one to expect.
values of eighteen series of observations made on board the 'Galatea,'
75 mile to 4.

  6 oz.
  12 oz.

12   3.
0    4.

75 inch





The numbers under the respective weights express the recorded value of
  They must be simply taken as a ready means of expressing
ear.
 charge marked 4, and a 12-oz.
4.
intensity, thus proving that an addition of 30 per cent.
larger charges produces no sensible difference in the sound.
sounds estimated by some physical means, instead of by the ear, the
opinion, show a greater advance with the increase of material than
  Subsequent experiments
of the smaller charges of gun-cotton.

'nesses' and promontories, where the land is clasped on both sides for
propagate itself rearward as well as forward--the use of the parabolic
than an advantage.
most appropriate source of sound.
applicable to such lightships as are intended to spread the sound all

As a signal in rock lighthouses, where neither syren, steam-whistle,
the lumber of special signal-guns, the gun-cotton will prove
  But in most of these cases we have the drawback that
  The lantern of the rock
mechanical arrangements might be devised, both in the case of the
gun-cotton at a safe distance, no such arrangement could compete, as
gun-cotton rocket.
Bishop's Rock lighthouse, the ill-fated 'Schiller' might have been
before she reached the rock which wrecked her.
possessed such a signal, instead of the ubiquitous but ineffectual
collision.

lighthouses, and of clearing obstacles which cast an acoustic shadow,
Collinson, Deputy Master of the Trinity House.
a disk or short cylinder of gun-cotton in the head of a rocket, the
elevation of 1000 feet or thereabouts, where by the ignition of a fuse
its sound in all directions vertically and obliquely down upon earth
  The first attempt to realise this idea was made on July 18,
  Brock, at Nunhead.
Eight rockets were then fired, four being charged with 5 oz.
with 7.
 of gun-cotton.
exploded with a very loud report in the air.
were tried at Shoeburyness.

sounds at the Mouse Lighthouse, 8.
  by S, and at the Chapman
5 miles W.
the firing-point.
Chapman Lighthouse, land and trees intervened between the firing-point
  This,' as General Younghusband justly
should be found necessary to place a signal station in a position
' Indeed, the clearing of
had in view.

compare the range of explosions produced near the surface of the earth
rockets.
one of the objects of a series of experiments conducted on December
  It is worthy, however, of note that on
distinctly heard at a distance of 11.

5 oz.
1877, these comparative experiments of firing at high and low
  The gun-cotton near the ground
5-lb.
4.

The rockets carried the same quantity of gun-cotton in their heads,
was from 800 to 900 feet.
of snow and hail, the direction of the sound being at right angles to
  Five series of observations were made on board the
  The mean value of
ground by a small but sensible quantity.
however, which was nearly to leeward, and 5.
firing-point, in nineteen cases out of twenty-four the disk fired near
advantage.

  A few
angular space all round it were absolutely free from cloud.
deck of the 'Galatea' a rocket was discharged, which reached a great
  Following this solid
a continually greater distance, dying gradually off into silence after
  These echoes were of the same character as
called by me 'aerial echoes.

results of that day's observations being that the sounds were heard at
E.
75 miles to the
E.
5 miles to the N.
; and at Clacton
5 miles to the N.
 by 1/2 E.
time from the S.
  Some of these sounds were produced by rockets,
  howitzer, and some by an 8-inch Maroon.

 Gardiner, the managing director of the
the gun-cotton.
03,
70.
material being thus compressed into the same volume, Mr.
thought that a greater sonorous effect must be produced by the powder.
At the instance of Mr.
thoroughly into the subject, a Committee of the Elder Brethren visited
Faversham, on the 16th of June, 1877.
employed were 2 oz, 8 oz, 1 lb, and 2 lbs, in the form of rockets and
  The experiments
 Mackie.
this occasion was to get 'as near to windward as possible, but the
5 mile.
here E.
E.
N.

The cotton-powder yielded a very effective report.
general had a slight advantage over the same quantities of material
  The loudness of the sound was by no means
 yielding
  The 'aerial echoes,' which
long-continued.

howitzers and rockets was carried out at Shoeburyness.
the howitzer was 3 lbs.
 G.
  The charges of the rockets
 of gun-cotton respectively.
and the four rockets constituted a series, and eight series were fired
  The observations were made from the
permitted the sound to reach the observers with the Wind, against the
  The distance of the 'Galatea' varied from
movements, being 2 to 3 miles.
the howitzer, firing a 3-lb.
our best gun at 'the South Foreland, was beaten by the 12-oz.
by the 8-oz.
 rocket.
 rocket alone

It is worth while recording the distances at which some of the sounds

  Leigh         6.
N.
      24 out of 40 sounds heard.

  Girdler       12 miles S.
 by E.


  Reculvers    171 miles S.
 by S.

4.
 Nicholas 20 miles S.
           3 out of 40 sounds heard.

  Epple Bay    22 miles S.
 by E.

6.
E.
     9 out of 40 sounds heard.

  Kingsgate    25 miles S.
  by E.

The day was cloudy, with occasional showers of drizzling rain; the
W.
 all day; at times squally, rising to a force of
  The station at
  At
5 to 24.
miles, nothing was heard, while at eleven stations to windward,
  It was
did not penetrate much beyond 3 miles.

 the 18th October, we proceeded to Dungeness
with gun-cotton and cotton-powder.
2 oz.
others, containing similar quantities of cotton-powder, had been
  With these were
Dungeness, firing the usual charge of 3 lbs.

From these experiments it appeared that the guncotton and

The effectiveness of small charges was illustrated in a very striking

 rocket.
9
9, the value of the 4-oz.
intermediate between them.
very practised observers on board the 'Galatea.
borne out by the observations of the Coastguard, who marked the value
 rocket 5.
  The
be in part ascribed to the imperfection of the powder.
performance of the syren was, on the whole, less satisfactory than
  The instrument was worked, not by steam of 70
 pressure, as at the South Foreland, but by compressed air,
 and ending with 30 lbs.
  The trumpet
was about as effective as that of the 8-oz.
  But in a
this direction, the syren fell very sensibly behind even the 2-oz.
rocket.

rocket and other fog-signals; but they are not the only ones.
2nd of August, 1877, for example, experiments were made at Lundy
  At 2 miles distant from the

  Both the 4-oz.

shadow, and yielded loud reports.
were still superior to the gun.
 Ann's,
 and 8-oz.
  On the
 was employed to
instrument.

25 mile, with the 18-pounder
was quite unheard, while the 4-oz.
which brought it clearly into view, yielded a powerful sound in the

On the evening of February 9th, 1877, a remarkable series of
 Prentice at Stowmarket with the
  From the report with which he has kindly furnished
  The first column in the
second its distance from the firing-point, and the third the result

distinctly heard 53 seconds after the flash.

  Thought at
                              from the sea.

                              the open air and in a closed room.
                              Wind in favour of sound.

           19 miles St.
                              pheasants  in a cover close by.

           10 miles St.
                              away like thunder.

  11 miles Report arrived a little more than a

Nettlestead Hall      6 miles Distinct in every part of observer's
  Very loud in the open air.


Nacton               14 miles Reports quite distinct--mistaken by

Aldboro'             25 miles Rockets seen through a very hazy

Capel Mills          11 miles Reports heard within and without the
  Wind opposed to sound.

5 miles Reports distinct: attributed to

In the great majority of these cases, the direction of the sound
  In some cases,
  It is
commanding ranges such as these.

considerable elevation by rockets, is a familiar performance.
1873, moreover, the Board of Trade proposed a light-and-sound rocket
in a form too elaborate and expensive for practical use.
a gun-cotton rocket fit for signalling in fogs is, I believe, wholly


 Brock, that idea is now an accomplished fact; a
the service of our mariners.
association with lighthouses and lightships, but in the Navy also it
  Soon after the loss of the
desirability of having an organized code of fog-signals for the fleet.
He shook his head doubtingly, and referred to the difficulty of
  The gun-cotton rocket completely
while its discharges may be so grouped and combined as to give a most
  It is
coast, where its establishment might be desirable, a fog-signal

*****
I have referred more than once to the train of echoes which
as similar in all respects to those which were described for the first
Trinity House in 1874.
Transactions' for 1874, p.
]  To these echoes I attached a
  There was no visible reflecting surface
  On some days, with hardly a cloud in the

the air in front of the great trumpet which produced them.
trumpet blasts were five seconds in duration, but long before the
primitive note of the trumpet.
continued, retreating further and further from the point of
  The echoes
'tapering' by imperceptible gradations into absolute silence.
when a ship happened to throw itself athwart the course of the sound,
which rudely interrupted the continuity of the dying atmospheric

These echoes have been ascribed to reflection from the crests of the
  But this hypothesis is negatived by the fact, that the
existed--when the sea, in fact, was of glassy smoothness.
also shown that the direction of the echoes depended not on that of
trumpet.
trumpet to sound at various points of the arc, the echoes were always,
atmosphere towards which the trumpet was directed.
under the circumstances, come from the glassy sea; while both their
silence, are irreconcilable with the notion that they came from fixed
  They came from that portion of the atmosphere
as the direct sound penetrated to greater atmospheric distances.

fine.
serenity of the air caused me to test the echoing power of the
  A single ship lay about half a mile distant between us
  The result of the proposed experiment was clearly
  It was this.
great height; the echoes retreated in their usual fashion, becoming
reflection from the observers increased.
explosion, a single loud shock was sent back to us from the side of
  Obliterated for a moment by
dying away into silence in two or three seconds afterwards.
The echoes of the gun fired on shore this day were very brief; those
 gun-cotton rocket were 12" and those of the 8-oz.
cotton-powder rocket 11" in duration.

 rocket from the deck of the
seven seconds.
 Prentice, who was present at the time, assured me
more than twice this duration.
render this result in the highest degree probable.

opportunity of repeating, is an operation of some risk; and it is not
announced by Professor Joseph Henry, which he considers adverse to the
  He took the trouble to point the trumpet of
no echo was returned.
these echoes are for the most part due to differences of temperature
  If, through any cause, the air above be chilled,
ascending streams as the initial cause of atmospheric flocculence.
sound proceeding vertically does not cross the streams, nor impinge
across them.
vertical sound as they accompany the horizontal one.
as I interpret it, is not opposed to the theory of these echoes which
  But, as I have indicated, not only to
its full significance.

Professor Osborne Reynolds refers to these echoes in the following
which have been observed, I will merely call attention to the fact
[Footnote: These carried 12 oz.
Col.
explosion.
and pistols.
connected with the direction given to the sound.
the voice, trumpets, and the syren, all of which give direction to the
case of a sound which has no direction of greatest intensity.
reference to the voice, and other references in his paper, cause me to
myself are dealing with different phenomena.
foregoing observations render it perfectly certain that the condition
the echoes.

be brought out by experiments in the air of the laboratory.
recently made the following experiment: A rectangle, x Y (p.
22 inches by 12, was crossed by twenty-three brass tubes (half the
having a slit along it from which gas can issue.
twenty-three low flat flames were obtained.
in a short tube was placed at one end of the rectangle, and a
Sound,' 3rd edition, p.
]  f, at some distance beyond the other
  When the reed sounded, the flame in front of it was violently
  Turning on the gas, and lighting
heterogeneous that the sensitive flame was instantly stilled, rising
  Here we had the
imitated.
 268.
the gas, and removing the sensitive flame to f, some distance behind

reflected from the heterogeneous air threw the sensitive flame into
  Here we had imitated the aerial echoes heard when
 The

Fig.

*****
The explosive rapidity of dynamite marks it as a substance specially
  At the suggestion of Professor
 McRoberts has carried out a series of experiments on
  Immediately after the
 Brock





  ON THE STUDY OF PHYSICS.

Britain in the Spring of 1854.

of lectures, and the title of the present lecture A there stated to be
'
of the Study of Physics as a Branch of Education.
editorial alteration may seem, the two words suggest two radically
  The term Education
wherein the education of a single faculty consists, this will help us
faculties, or of the mind.
education of the voice, what do we mean?  There are certain membranes
between them from the lungs, thus producing musical sounds.
membranes are, to some extent, under the control of the will, and it
of a clearer and more melodious character.
education of the voice.
old, festive or solemn; the education of the voice being the object
education is accomplished.
case more clearly than if we were to call the songs a branch of
  Regarding also the education of the human mind as the
the study of Physics as a means towards the attainment of this end.
From this point of view, I degrade Physics into an implement of

The term Physics, as made use of in the present Lecture, refers to
and chemistry.
enormous weight,' while the latter is Physics applied to atoms and
  The subjects of Physics proper are therefore those which
motion, the loadstone, electrical attractions and repulsions, thunder
  Our senses stand
  We observe the fact,
be accounted for--fitted into its position in the line of cause and
  Taking our facts from Nature we transfer them to the domain
and connexions, and bringing them ever clearer before the mental eye,
  This is the last act
multiplicity of facts to the central cause on which they depend.
having guessed the cause, we are not yet contented.
the centre and travel in the other direction.
certain consequences must follow from it, and we appeal to the law and
  Thus is the circuit
unity, and from within outward, from unity to multiplicity.
traversing both ways the line between cause and effect, all our
  The mental effort involved in
invoke the co-operation of every muscle, and thus confer upon the

The first experiment a child makes is a physical experiment: the
infant.
reverence, or to make him a worse citizen, when his riper experience
draught from his mother's breast.
experimenter: he grasps at the moon, and his failure teaches him to
  At length his little fingers acquire sufficient
  He thrusts the instrument
matter.
rattle against the table.
with intention, and thus the young student receives his first lessons
  There are pains and penalties, however,
just as sure to inform him of the fact.
his fingers, cuts his hand, scalds his tongue, and in this way learns
  This is Nature's way of
  His
occupies the foreground of human happiness; but the blossoms of a
relation of cause and effect dawns upon the boy.
that the present condition of things is not final, but depends upon
  He
curiosity, asks all manner of inconvenient questions.
tendencies of human nature express themselves through these early
  As thought ripens, he desires to know the
and unless this desire has been granted for the express purpose of
like the blush of the forbidden fruit, conferred merely for the
fairly claim for the study of Physics the recognition that it answers

A few days ago, a Master of Arts, who is still a young man, and
he had reached the age of twenty years he had never been taught
  Twelve
ancients.
  Now, we cannot,
 The
draws nutriment from them.
of any great deed or utterance; for such are prolific throughout all
  We cannot yield the companionship of our loftier brothers of
sympathetic greatness across the interval of two thousand years.
long as the ancient languages are the means of access to the ancient
these avenues might be kept open without making such sacrifices as
  We have conquered and possessed
nothing; and if new continents of thought reveal themselves to the
latter days, the study of Physics has given us glimpses of the methods
false to the trust committed to us, if we were to sacrifice the hopes

The bias of my own education probably manifests itself in a desire I
assumptions and conclusions by experience.
true, your own consciousness might be appealed to in proof of the
it by the senses; but I trust you will excuse me if, instead of doing
through life, referring to your judgment to decide whether such facts
local.

for some time, and which is now converted into a school for the
met weekly for the purpose of reading reports and papers upon various
  The Society had its president and treasurer; and abstracts
issuing from the school press.
these weekly meetings was, that after the general business had been
subject on which he desired information.
written out previously in a book, or, if a question happened to
and handed in to the Secretary, who afterwards read all the questions
  A number of teachers were usually present, and they and the
  As
from eighteen to eight years old, many odd questions were proposed.
the mind which loves to detect in the tendencies of the young the
certain philosophic interest, and I have therefore thought it not
and to introduce them here.








darker than before?
What is meant by Lancashire witches?
Does the dew rise or fall?
What is the principle of the hydraulic press?
Is there more oxygen in the air in summer than in winter?
What are those rings which we see round the gas and sun?
What is thunder?
How is it that a black hat can be moved by forming round it a magnetic





have been copied almost at random from the book alluded to, we see
not such as had an interest conferred on them' by previous culture.
Now the fact is beyond the boy's control, and so certainly is the
  The sole question then is, whether this
  Who created the fact?  Who
  Who then will undertake to
divorce between them?  Take, for example, the case of the wetted
questions in the list.
curiosity, as the subject is improper for him to know, and thus
which acts to his prejudice?  Or, recognising the propriety of the
without reference to the laws of optics--without making the boy to
  You may say that the effect is due
different refractive indices.
of the boy a knowledge of what reflection and refraction are, or

On looking more closely into the matter, we find that our wet towel
of philosophers.
white, that foam is white, that pounded granite or glass is white, and
  On quitting one medium and
condition--the media must possess different refractive indices.
when we immerse a bit of glass in water, light is reflected from the
the glass.
the same refractive index as itself, it immediately disappears.
remember once dropping the eyeball of an ox into water; it vanished as
surprise was so great as to cause a bystander to suppose that the
  This, however, was not
that of water cleared up the whole matter.
identical, and hence the light pursued its way through both as if they

In the case of snow, powdered quartz, or salt, we have a transparent
  At every transition from solid to air, or
place so often that the light is wholly intercepted.
mixture of two transparent bodies we obtain an opaque one.
case of the towel is precisely similar.
semi-transparent vegetable fibres, with the interstices between them
surfaces of air and fibre, and hence the towel becomes opaque like
  But if we fill the interstices with water, we diminish
darkness of the towel is due to its increased transparency.
deportment of various minerals, such as hydrophane and tabasheer, the
considerations of the highest scientific interest, are involved in the

Again, take the question regarding the rising or falling of the dew--a
researches of Wells.
intelligence will be satisfied with the simple answer that the dew
  He will wish to learn how you know that it falls, and, if
opinion of Father Laurus, that a goose egg filled in the morning with
being better for the experiment than a goose egg.
give the boy a clear notion of the beautiful phenomenon to which his
radiation and conduction of heat.
grass, from which one of these orient pearls is depending.

amount of warmth imparted by the sun; during a serene night, heat is
loss, there is a flow of heat from the earth to the blade.
blade loses heat by radiation, and gains heat by conduction.
the case before us, the power of radiation is great, whereas the power
than it gains, and hence becomes more and more refrigerated.
light vapour floating around the surface so cooled is condensed upon
call a dew-drop.

senses to be the outcome and flower of the deepest laws.
becomes, in a measure, sanctified as an object of thought, and
  He thus learns that
apparent brotherhood in Nature are organically united, and finds the
  To enlist
utmost importance; for the exercise of the mind, like that of the
accomplished.
mechanical motion is comprehended under the idea of healthful
ulterior ends in the mere enjoyment of it.
be substituted for the action of the playground, where the boy plays
laws; while kindly Nature accomplishes her ends unconsciously, and
  You may have more
of each particular muscle, but you cannot create the joy and gladness
the exercise are gone.
mind.

which are complementary to each other--the tracing of facts to their
  In the
play.
receptivity, and a willingness to abandon all preconceived notions,
  Believe
the world never hears, is often enacted in the private experience of
  And if a man be not capable of this
fact, he lacks, in my opinion, the first mark of a true philosopher.

idea of producing a sensation in the world, who loves the truth better
a single eye, finds in that task an indirect means of the highest
  And although the virtue of the act depends upon its
the truth, no matter how it may present itself--even at the hands of a
  When
washed away--when a man consents to lay aside his vanity and to become
humility.

indicate that I regard the man of science as a heroic, if not indeed
reverse.
struggles for priority, to that unpleasant egotism which screams
young.
account, to the weakness--or, if you will--to the selfishness of Man,

The second process in physical investigation is _deduction_, or the
flow from them.
process, which, however, was practised by every healthy mind before
  In the study of Physics, induction and
  The man observes,
by their essences; having effected this, he at once deduces, and thus

Here the grand difference between the methods at present followed, and
 They were one-sided in these
conjecture for observation.
mission of Man to 'replenish the earth, and subdue it.
subjugation of Nature is only to be accomplished by the penetration of
  This not only
forces, but makes them our slaves.
indeed opened to us treasuries of power of which antiquity never
  But while we lord it over Matter, we have thereby become
the study of Physics furnishes a screen against which the human spirit

Thus, then, as a means of intellectual culture, the study of Physics
logic into play: it compares, abstracts, and generalizes, and provides
  The strictest
and sagacity are demanded.
continually checks itself, and thus walks on a foundation of facts.
Hence the exercise it invokes does not end in a mere game of
to the mastery of Nature.
world, and the consciousness of augmented strength which accompanies

With regard to the effect on the imagination, certain it is that the
the most daring flights of that faculty.
an all-pervading aether which transmits a tingle, so to speak, to the
  The
and certainty as that with which an engineer measures a base and two
  Now it
measurement of an aethereal undulation as in that of the river; for
destroys those notions of size which appeal to the poetic sense.
is a mistake to suppose, with Dr.


the observations and calculations of a practical astronomer.
not until the man withdraws from his calculation, as a painter from
engaged, that imagination and wonder are excited.
a possible danger here.
too exclusively pursued, they may impair the imagination, and thus the
theological, or political studies, when carried to excess.
in this case, the injury done is to the investigator himself: it does
  Indeed, the conceptions furnished by
excite in the highest degree that sentiment of wonder which,
for my part, should be sorry to see banished from the world.

intellectual culture; but like other things in Nature, this study
  The colours of the clouds delight
selfsame clouds hold within their fleeces the moisture by which our
  The sunbeams excite our interest and
influences to our fruits and corn, and thus accomplish, not only
necessities.

While the love of science is a sufficient incentive to the pursuit of
raised above all material considerations, the results of his labours
community.
scientific investigator himself; for he usually pursues his object

And let him who is dazzled by such applications--who sees in the
human genius and the only legitimate object of scientific research,
  Let him beware
of science pursues his task, the calculations of what he is pleased to
  The professed utilitarian is unfortunately, in most
results are derived.
conditions of its growth.
his own way; for if you invade his freedom by your so-called practical
his success as a discoverer depends.
man look to those from the fecundity of whose thought be, and
  Were they inspired in
them.
compensation for their penury in the delight which their favourite

In the words of one well qualified to speak upon this subject, 'I say
voluntary starvation of the late Graff; but compare what is considered
with the expected results of a life of successful commercial
for society in either case, and you will be constrained to allow that
not paid, and cannot be paid for their work, as indeed it is of a sort
'
But while the scientific investigator, standing upon the frontiers of
surrounding region of the unknown, makes the discovery of truth his
in the practical application of the truth discovered.
something ennobling in the triumph of Mind over Matter.
from its uses to society, there is something elevating in the idea of
wire, and made it the minister of his will.
directions appear to be commensurate with our needs.
subdued horse and mule, and obtained from them all the service which
more potent agents to execute our purposes.
steam-engine appears.
since we struck into the scientific methods which have produced these
  We cannot for an instant regard them as the final
to do.
Nature.
world together, and the instincts and successes of Man assure him that

As an instrument of intellectual culture, the study of Physics is
though not so great, is still more tangible.
Members of Parliament be ignorant of the subjects concerning which
why should they be unable to form an independent opinion upon a
be left at the mercy of interested disputants when a scientific
him from the bewilderments of the committee-room?  The education which
England.
the term working, the study of Physics would, I imagine, be
moral influence to woo them from pursuits which now degrade them.
man's reformation oftener depends upon the indirect, than upon the
  The will must be exerted in the choice of
barrier against it.
condition if he content himself merely with saying, or swearing, that
  His thoughts, if not attracted by another
from this, you must give him an equivalent.

prompts reflection, new enjoyments would be opened to the working man,
against temptation.
present an extensive field of observation, and were those who work in
see, the results might be incalculable.
Samsons are at the present moment toiling with closed eyes in the
sight, and you multiply the chances of discovery, and with them the
  In our multitudinous technical
which is often the cause of our destruction.
work in a locomotive of which the maker of it probably never dreamed,
of death.
who work in our coal mines, those terrific explosions which occur from
  If these men possessed sufficient
emanate a system by which these shocking accidents might be avoided.
Possessed of the knowledge, their personal interests would furnish the
would be served at the same time the elevation of the men and the

Before the present Course of Lectures was publicly announced, I had
thinking that my place might be better filled by an older and more
  To my experience, however, such as it was, I
revealed themselves to my own eyes, and have been enacted in my own
  There is one mind common to us all; and the true
by the response which it calls forth in the convictions of my hearers.
I ask your permission to proceed a little further in this fashion, and
presented themselves to my notice during my brief career as a teacher
  The facts, though extremely
the present discourse, may yet serve to illustrate an educational

One of the duties which fell to my share was the instruction of a
geometry generally, when properly and sympathetically addressed to the
  But it was
book, and to appeal to their self-power in the treatment of questions
  At first, the change from the
amid strangers; but in no single instance did this feeling continue.
When utterly disheartened, I have encouraged the boy by the anecdote
men, mainly to his own patience; or of Mirabeau, when he ordered his
that blockhead of a word.
task with a smile, which perhaps had something of doubt in it, but
  I have seen
of Archimedes was but a simple expansion, heard him exclaim, 'I have
' The consciousness of self-power, thus awakened, was of
astonishing.
pursuing their propositions in the book, or of trying their strength
  Never in a single instance was the
  I was ever ready to assist when help was needful, but my
  The boys had tasted
own.
upon the playground, and numberless other illustrations were afforded
  For my own part, as
nothing of the rules of pedagogics, as the Germans name it; but
discourse, and endeavouring to make geometry a means rather than a
  The experiment was successful, and some of the
vigorous and cheerful expansion of mental power, when appealed to in

Our pleasure was enhanced when we applied our mathematical knowledge
  Many objects of hourly contact
  The swing,
rebound of the football, the advantage of a small boy over a large one
subjects of investigation.
her own height; it was required to know how much of the glass was
she might dispense with the lower half and see her whole figure
  It was also pleasant to prove by mathematics, and
twice that of the mirror which reflects it.
were able to determine the number of times the insect flaps its wings
  Following up our researches upon the pendulum, we
figure of the earth; and we were also startled by the inference which
earth were seventeen times its present amount, the centrifugal force
so that an inhabitant of those regions would then have the same
  All these things were sources
gifted with the powers which had reached such results, and that the
future day we might possibly push the subject a little further, and

I ought to apologise to you for dwelling so long upon this subject;
impression on me.
human nature, and obtained some notion of a teacher's vocation.
there be one profession in England of paramount importance, I believe
selfishness and incompetence do most serious mischief, by lowering the
noble truthfulness ought to be the feelings evoked, it is that of the
  When a man of enlarged heart and mind comes
observes the operation of his own character evidenced in the elevation
being honourable.
  The man is a blessing to
  Such men, I believe, are to be found
mechanics of education at the present day, to seek them out.
matter what means of culture may be chosen, whether physical or
love, and earnestness, which the teacher himself brings with him to

Let me again, and finally, remind you that the claims of that science
logic of Nature upon the reason of her child--that its disciplines, as
between Man and the universe of which he forms a part.
side, we have the apparently lawless shifting of phenomena; on the
its own indestructible instincts, as well as through the teachings of
  To

to discern its harmonies, and to make them the lessons of our lives.
From the cradle to the grave we are surrounded with objects which
  Descending for a moment from this high plea to
and furnaces, of steam and electricity: as a land which science,
you whether this 'land of old and just renown' has not a right to
present needs than that supplied by declension and conjugation?  And
regarding it exclusively as the instrument of material prosperity, let
counterpoise by pointing out its nobler uses--lifting the national
'increasing purpose' which runs through the ages and widens the

********************
XII.

[Footnote: From a discourse delivered in the Royal Institution of
]
WHEN the student of physical science has to investigate the character
mixture of other forces, and thus study its simple action.
example, he wishes to know how a mass of liquid would shape itself if
that these forces have free and undisturbed exercise.
perhaps refer him to the dewdrop for a solution of the question; but
liquid upon each other, but also with the action of gravity upon the
  If he would
detach the liquid mass from the action of gravity; he would then find
  Natural processes come to us in a
unintelligible confusion.
performers to be placed in the same room, each playing his own
each individual instrument might be a source of perfect music, still

Thus it is with the processes of nature, where mechanical and
  Their
it is the vocation of the man of science to resolve this noise into

The necessity of this detachment of one force from all other forces is
crystallisation.
of soda or Glauber salt.
molecules of that liquid, like disciplined squadrons under a governing
centres, and forming themselves into solid masses, which after a time
  I may,
confusion into this order.
into the vessel; the consequent action is not the pure expression of
of an unorganised mob, and not with the steady accuracy of a
 In this mass of bismuth also we have an example of
process is going on: here there is an architect at work 'who makes no
similar in shape and structure to those beautiful masses which we see
  By permitting alum to crystallise in this slow way,
crystallise, nature produces these beautiful rhomboids; when silica
by pyramids; by allowing saltpetre to crystallise we have these

forces free play; if the crystallising mass be permitted to rest upon
must be so suspended as to be surrounded on all sides by the liquid,
present all its faces in succession to the working builder.

themselves into layers which are perfectly parallel to each other, and
cleavage of the crystal.
thus far escaped the solvent and abrading forces which sooner or later
  I readily discover that it cleaves
  Again I lay my knife upon

cleaves again; and finally placing the knife at right angles to the
  Rocksalt cleaves in
may be broken up into any number of smaller cubes.
cleaves in three directions, not at right angles, but oblique to each
  In each of these cases
  For the
facility in different directions: heavy spar presents an example of

Turn we now to the consideration of some other phenomena to which the
  Beech, deal, and other woods cleave
the edge of the axe is laid across the rings which mark the growth of
  If you look at this bundle of hay severed from a rick, you
planes, and only a small force is required to separate them laterally.
But we cannot regard the cleavage of the tree as the same in character
  In the one case it is the molecules arranging
structure, in the other case the easy separation in one direction is
hay.

water.
sand and small plates of mica.
tide, or an estuary with water which holds such powder in suspension:
first, because they encounter least resistance, the mica afterwards,
spangles upon the surface of the sand.
its charge of mixed powder, deposits its duplex layer day after day,
preserving the alternations of sand and mica tell the tale of their
  Take the sand and mica, mix them together in water, and
indicated, and by repeating the process you can actually build up a

the particles of mica are strewn.
from Halifax, and other masses from the quarries of Over Darwen in
  With a hammer and chisel I can
purposes in the districts from which the specimens have come, and
' But you will discern without a word
than that of a hayrick is.

This, so far as I am aware of, has never been imagined, and it has
cleavage at all, but to restrict the term to a phenomenon of a totally

Those who have visited the slate quarries of Cumberland and North
  We have
school-boys ciphered on these slates, they were used for tombstones in
a comparatively late period did men begin to enquire how their
  What is the agency which enables us
crown to base?  This question is at the present moment one of the
more than any other.
  Looking into the quarry
two years ago.
beside me on the quarry's edge, 'are the planes of stratification
position.
difficulty of the problem.
at a high angle to the bedding.
am able to place the proof of this before you.
slate in which both the planes of cleavage and of bedding are

  The cleavage of slates then is not a question of

 Sedgwick
or polar forces subsequent to the consolidation of the rock.
affirm,' he says, 'that no retreat of the parts, no contraction of

or polar forces acted upon the whole mass simultaneously in one
'  And again, in another place:
a beautiful crystalline cleavage, passing alike through all the
' [Footnote: Transactions of the Geological Society, ser.
vol.
 p.
]
The utterance of such a man struck deep, as it ought to do, into the
entertain this view either in whole or in part.
to Sir Charles Lyell, dated from the Cape of Good Hope February 20,
heated as to allow of a commencement of crystallisation, that is to
begin to move amongst themselves, or at least on their own axes, some
will rest on cooling.
to the direction in which the heat escapes.
majority of particles of the same nature have a general tendency to
']  The
to run riot, and we have books published on the action of polar forces
about the subject.
Wales and Cumberland, mountains included, are neither more nor less
  These masses of slate were
older rocks.
mixed mechanically together.
consolidated, and the theory before us assumes that a process of
it a single plane of cleavage.
inadmissible, stretch of analogies, this hypothesis has done good
  Right or wrong, a thoughtfully uttered theory has a dynamic
provoking opposition is eventually of service to the cause of truth.
It would, however, have been remarkable if, among the ranks of
slate-cleavage involving a less hardy assumption.

  This has
Geological Society, who, to the loss of science and the sorrow of all
 Henry
associated with slaty cleavage, and having a most important bearing

Fossil shells are found in these slate-rocks.
specimens of such shells in the actual rock, and occupying various
  They are squeezed,
inference that the rock which contains these shells has been subjected
cleavage.
planes.
these others which have suffered distortion.
some along, and some oblique to the cleavage of the slate in which
for its production a compressing force acting, at right angles to the
  As the trilobites lay in the mud, the jaws of a
the shapes you see.

layers of finer rock, through which and across the gritty layer pass
  The coarse layer is found bent by the
  Mr.
described a striking case of this kind.
experimentally imitated; the amount of compression might, moreover, be
its length measured and compared with the shorter distance into which
  We find in this way that the yielding of the

Let me now direct your attention to another proof of pressure; you see

particles, which, owing to their size, shape and gravity, sink first
  Gradually, from bottom to
layer of exceedingly fine grain.
from which are derived the German razor-stones, so much prized for the

When a bed is thin, the fine-grain slate is permitted to rest upon a
thick, it is cut into slices which are cemented to pieces of ordinary
  The mud thus deposited is, as
forward, and deposited among coarser material by the rivers from which
  Here are such nodules enclosed in
  Everybody, moreover, who has ciphered upon a school-slate
surface of the slate, and over which the pencil usually slid as if the
  Now these spots are composed of the finer mud, and
surrounding gritty portions of the slate.
of these spots: you observe them, on the cleavage surface, in broad
  But turn the slate edgeways and the section of each
cleavage.
 Sorby.
have made excursions to the quarries of Wales and Cumberland, and to
  Thus
highest significance as regards a most important geological problem.
From the magnetic deportment of these slates, I was led to infer that
slate.
 Hambly in the laboratory of
 Percy at the School of Mines with the following result:
ANALYSIS OF SLATE.


1.
85
2.
13
                    Mean   5.


1.
24
2.
12
                    Mean   3.

immediately adjacent to the greenish spot is nearly double the
  This is about the proportion

Let me now remind you that the facts brought before you are
  We have seen shells
marl flattened; and all these sources of independent testimony point
subjected to enormous pressure in a direction at right angles to the

In reference to Mr.
supposing it to be stretched out and its length measured, it would
the bed.
of yielding.
marked upon it; the lower portions of each layer being composed of a
suppose the contorted bed to be composed of.
gritty portions, the cleavage turns, as if tending to cross the
  When the pressure began to act, the
longitudinal pressure; as it bent, the pressure became gradually more
would infer from an action of this kind--it is neither quite across
above and below it, but intermediate between both.
cleavage to be at right angles to the pressure, this is the direction

Thus we have established the concurrence of the phenomena of cleavage
remains, Is the pressure sufficient to account for the cleavage?  A
affirmative.
in the true spirit of a physical investigator.
cleavage of the flags of Halifax and Over Darwen, which is caused by
  Mr.
Sorby finds plates of mica to be also a constituent of slate-rock.
asks himself, what will be the effect of pressure upon a mass
argues, and he argues rightly, to place the plates with their flat
pressure is exerted.
with a fine powder, and on squeezing the mass finds that the tendency
pressure.
mass cleaves.

 Sorby, it
on elongated particles, or plates, will be such as he describes it.
But while the scales must be regarded as a true cause, I should not
  I
cleavage of slate-rocks would be much the same as it is at present.

scales of iron, or anything analogous to them.
substance submitted to pressure.
eminent geologists now before me to the structure of this wax.
slate ever exhibited so clean a cleavage; it splits into laminae of
sufficient to produce cleavage, and that this cleavage is independent
  I have purposely mixed this wax with
the cleavage is sensibly affected by their presence--if anything, I
it.

cleavage to that of the wax.
surface of this slate from Borrodale in Cumberland.
precisely the same features in both: you see flakes clinging to the
 Let
be led to the conclusion that they are the product of a common cause.
[Footnote: I have usually softened the wax by warming it, kneaded it
previously wetted.
is soft, and tears rather than cleaves; on this account I cool my
thus cooled they split cleanly.

this remarkable result?  This may be stated in a very few words.

structure.
the fracture presents to my eyes innumerable surfaces along which it
the cohesion of the mass is less than elsewhere.
and even this wax, and observe the same result; look at the mud at the
Kensington Gardens on drying after rain,--they are cracked and split,
cohesion is a minimum.
mud.
which the cohesion is comparatively small.
idea, and you will see it composed of numberless irregular polyhedra
  Imagine such a mass subjected
resistance; the little polyhedra become converted into laminae,
infallible result will be a tendency to cleave at right angles to the
 [Footnote: It is scarcely necessary to say that if the
could be produced; it must have room to yield in a lateral direction.
Mr.
white-lead in a fine granular state, and to accomplish this he first
  The mould was conical, and permitted the lead to
  The lamination was as perfect as that
powder.

  If you
multitudes of them so small that you cannot see them.
these cavities must take place in squeezed mud, and this must to some

Although the time at my disposal has not permitted me duly to develope
presented itself to me almost daily under one aspect or another.
have never eaten a biscuit during this period without remarking the
  You have only to break a
structure.
  I
to a high temperature during the conflagration of Mr.
premises, with that of a biscuit.
caused it to swell, and the mechanical structure it reveals is
  During these enquiries I have received
  Here is some such
  The cleavage of our hills
  The
  It has
along which the dough divides into layers.
must not be handled too much; it ought, moreover, to be rolled on a
thus rendering the paste more homogeneous and less liable to split.
Puff-paste is, then, simply an exaggerated case of slaty cleavage.

nevertheless, it embraces not only the cases mentioned, but, if time
range of application.
is more or less spongy, an aggregate in fact of small nodules: it is
of rolling.
  But notwithstanding
  The
  Here is a mass acted upon
fibrous structure.
 Percy,

Break a piece of ordinary iron and you have a granular fracture; heat
fibrous.
locomotives have slid-den; the granules have yielded and become
  They exfoliate or come off in leaves; all these effects
cleavage forms the most prominent example.
observations on this subject by Mr.
Philosophical Magazine for August, 1856.

  You have witnessed
facts which are found associated with the cleavage of slate rocks.
Such facts, as expressed by Helmholtz, are so many telescopes to our
antiquity, and discern the forces which have been in operation upon

        Or the eagle soared.

come to the conclusion that these slaty masses have been subjected to
shown--and this is the only really new point which has been brought

footsteps we trace amid the crags of Wales and Cumberland, extending
roll over the half-dried mud of our streets without revealing to us
  Let me say, in conclusion,
indicates the dawning of a new day for their science.
intellects who have laboured at geology, and who have raised it to its
mass; they had no time to look after details.
exact knowledge is increasing; facts are flowing in which, while they
supplanting by solid truths the uncertain speculations which beset the
  Geologists now aim to imitate, as far as
are approaching more and more to the domain of physics, and I trust
across the common boundary of our sciences, and pursue our respective

[I would now lay more stress on the lateral yielding, referred to in
 Warren De la Rue's attempt to produce
sliding, than I was prepared to do when this lecture was given.
sliding is, I think, the principal cause of the planes of weakness,
  J.
 1871.


  ON PARAMAGNETIC AND DIAMAGNETIC FORCES
[Footnote: Abstract of a discourse delivered in the Royal Institution,
]
THE notion of an attractive force, which draws bodies towards the
Democritus, Pythagoras, and Epicurus; and the conjectures of these
that bodies attract each other as a magnet attracts iron.
applied the notion to bodies beyond the surface of the earth, and
  Thus
the conception of the force of gravitation.
closely at the matter, it will be seen that the magnetic force
holds the universe together.
particle of matter attracts every other particle; in magnetism also we
final effect being due to the difference of these two forces.
may be intensely acted on by a magnet, and still no motion of

gravity is supported, stands accurately level; but, after
north pole of the earth.
the arm of a fine balance, its weight is found unaltered by its
  In like manner, when the needle is permitted to float
pole of the earth, there is no motion of the mass towards that pole.
The reason is known to be, that although the marked end of the needle
equal force, the two equal and opposite forces neutralizing each

When the pole of an ordinary magnet is brought to act upon the
attracted end of the needle being nearer to the pole of the magnet
the two.
length of the needle is practically zero.
piece of iron is presented to a magnet, the nearer parts are
attracted portions are nearer to the magnet than the repelled ones, we
  Here then is the special
of gravitation.
former is duplex or polar.
would no more fall to the ground than a piece of iron towards the
supposition of Kepler and others may have been, it is clear that a
business of the universe.

diamagnetism, which manifests itself as a repulsion of certain bodies
that of magnetism; or as an unpolar force, beside that of gravitation.
When a cylinder of soft iron is placed within a wire helix, and
in other words, its polar excitation, is at once manifested by its
bismuth may not be substituted for the cylinder of iron, and its state
  The reason is, that the excitement of the bismuth
which it is enclosed; and the problem that now meets us is, so to
magnetic needle may be observed, unmixed with the action of the body

How this has been effected may be illustrated in the following

current is sent, the top of the helix attracts, while its bottom
contrary, is neutral, and exhibits neither attraction nor repulsion.
Such a helix is caused to stand between the two poles N'S' of an
 [Footnote: The reversal of the poles of the two
action of the earth as a magnet.
united by a rigid cross piece at their centres, and are suspended from

neutral point of the helix, so that when a current is sent through the
  Here then
and we are thus enabled to examine the action of a body placed within
latter.
inches long, suspended from a string and passing over a pulley, can be
  When it is so far sunk that its
poles N´S´ of the astatic system.
into a strong magnet, attracting one of the poles, and repelling the
  When
top of the helix, its lower end comes between the poles N´S´; and a
consequence.
mirror m is attached to the system of magnets; a beam of light thrown
the wall.
considerable, and its angular motion double that of the latter, a very
the image through several yards.

Devised by Prof.
  Weber, and constructed by M.
]
  It is manifest that if a
it, the action upon the astatic magnet may be exalted.
arrangement made use of in the actual enquiry.
feeble action, which it is here our object to seek, we have in the
placing them astatically.
and permitting them to act simultaneously on the four poles of the
would be, if only a single pole were used.
apparatus was enclosed in a suitable case which protected the magnets
plate in the case, by means of a telescope and scale placed at a

A pair of bismuth cylinders was first examined.
through the helices, and observing that the magnets swung perfectly
helices had their central or neutral points opposite to the poles of
  All being at rest the number on the scale marked by the
  The cylinders were then moved,
simultaneously upon the magnetic poles: the magnet moved promptly, and
made use of.
smaller to a larger number.
brought to bear upon the magnet: a prompt deflection was the
movement being from a larger to a smaller number.
manifest polar action of the bismuth cylinders upon the magnet; one
deflecting it in the opposite direction.

magnetic slate, of sulphate of iron, carbonate of iron, protochloride
was found that when the position of the magnetic cylinders was the
the former was always opposed in direction to that produced by the
must have been precisely antithetical to its disposition in the

But it will be urged, and indeed has been urged against this
be due to induced currents excited in the metal by its motion within
  In reply to this objection, it may be stated, in the
due to induced currents, which are only of momentary duration.
also been urged that such experiments ought to be made with other
currents of induction, the better the conductor the more exalted will
  This requirement was complied with.

  This
diamagnetic than bismuth.
to induced currents we ought to have it greater in the case of
polarity, the action of the bismuth ought to exceed that of the
  Experiment proves this to be the case.
deflection produced by these metals is due to their diamagnetic, and
  Copper cylinders were next
better than bismuth, but its diamagnetic power is nearly null; if the
enormously exaggerated degree, but no sensible deflection was produced

It has also been proposed by the opponents of diamagnetic polarity to
render the formation of induced currents impossible, and to test the
  This requirement was also
  It is only necessary to reduce the bismuth to powder and
so far oxidised as to render them perfectly insulating.
insulating power of the powder was exhibited experimentally;
action scarcely less powerful than that of the massive bismuth

But the most rigid proof, a proof admitted to be conclusive by those
to be stated.
diamagnetic force was discovered, were substituted for the metallic
the same in kind as that of the cylinders of bismuth.
also extended to other insulators: to phosphorus, sulphur, nitre,
each of these substances was proved to be polar, the disposition of
iron.
north pole, and its upper end a south pole, in virtue of the earth's
  A marble statue, on the contrary, has its feet a south
remark applies to its living archetype; each man walking over the
those of a mass of magnetic matter of the same shape and position.

different conductive powers of two metals for electricity, was
some of the statements made in reference to this subject.
bismuth was suspended by a twisted string between the two poles of an
  The cube was attached by a short copper wire to a
formed of four small triangular pieces of looking-glass.
light was suffered to fall upon this reflector, and as the reflector
followed each other in succession, each describing a circle about
  As the velocity of rotation augmented, these
  At a particular
rotating cube, and the strength of these currents, which increases
estimated by the time required to bring the cube and its associated
 With bismuth this time amounted to a score
almost instantly motionless when the circuit was established.


 PHYSICAL BASIS OF SOLAR CHEMISTRY.

Great Britain, June 7, 1861.

arrangement intended to prove that gaseous bodies radiate heat in
  Near a double screen of polished tin was placed an
from which a column of heated air ascended.
situated that no ray from the ball could reach the instrument, was an
delicate galvanometer.
heat is applied to the generation of electric currents; the strength

current is produced; but the slightest difference in the temperature
current, which, when carried through the galvanometer, indicates by

The two faces of the pile were in the first instance brought to the
galvanometer standing at zero.
air already referred to were permitted to fall upon one of the faces
that the radiation from the hot air, though sensible, was extremely
  Connected with the ring-burner was a holder containing oxygen
issue from the burner, strike the copper ball, and ascend in a heated
  The result was, that oxygen showed
air.

ring-burner.
cooled it in some degree.
disadvantage.
casts an amount of heat against the adjacent face of the pile
 This
gases with regard to their power of emitting radiant heat.

  The thermo-electric pile
state of constant ebullition; and it was so arranged that the
pile were exactly equal, thus neutralising each other.
the galvanometer being at zero, a sheet of oxygen gas was caused to
the pile.
intercepting the thermal rays from the cube, one face of the pile
temperature between its two faces would instantly set in, and the
  The quantity absorbed
galvanometer; the gas, in fact, proved perfectly transparent to the
  It had but a feeble power of radiation: it had an

The pile remaining in its position, a sheet of olefiant gas was caused
passed.
light went through it as freely as through oxygen or air; but its
expected from a sheet of metal.
the needle of the galvanometer, promptly quitting the zero line, moved
  Thus the olefiant gas, so light and clear
destroyer of the rays emanating from an obscure source.
reciprocity of action established in the case of oxygen comes out
absorber.

time, was typical of what had been obtained with gases generally.
Going through the entire list of gases and vapours in this way, we
and negative in electricity, or as north and south polarity in
  So that if we make the number which expresses the
its radiative power the denominator, the result would be, that on
proportion, the value of that fraction would always remain the same,

But why should this reciprocity exist?  What is the meaning of
into still water, rings of waves surround the place where it falls;
  When
nothing more than an undulatory motion of the air, is radiated in all
  Modern philosophy reduces light and heat to the same
  A luminous body is one with its atoms in a state
a rate which is incompetent to excite the sense of vision; and, as a
vibrations, so also the luminous or heated body has a medium, called
inconceivable velocity.
heat, is the transference of motion from the vibrating body to the
imparted to the air is soon transferred to surrounding objects,
technical language, absorbed; so also with regard to light and heat,
aether to the molecules of the absorbing body.

good ones: and the higher the degree of complexity in the atomic
absorption.
them afterwards by the process of abstraction.
atoms swinging like single spheres in the aether; they cannot create

its motion to the water than when its broad flat side is brought to
  In our present language the oar, broad side vertical,

oar-blade, will impart a greater amount of motion to it than when
  In the position in which the oar radiates
  Simple atoms glide through the aether
yield up more speedily their motion to the aether.
nitrogen mechanically, they absorb and radiate a certain amount of
  Cause these gases to combine chemically and form nitrous oxide,
times!
In this way we look with the telescope of the intellect into atomic
can never reach.
to the rays which they absorb.
for destruction, and allow other groups to pass unharmed.
best illustrated by a famous experiment of Sir David Brewster's,
  Into a glass cylinder, with
acid gas is introduced; the presence of the gas being indicated by its
  The beam from an electric lamp being sent through
eighteen inches wide is cast upon the screen.
cylinder containing the nitrous acid into the path of the beam as it
instantly furrowed by numerous dark bands, the rays answering to which
the intervening spaces is permitted to pass with comparative impunity.

absorption, holds good; and could we, without otherwise altering its
that the very rays which it absorbs are precisely those which it would
  When atmospheric air and other gases are brought to a state of
which we obtain from them consist of a series of bright bands.
such spectra are produced with the greatest brilliancy when, instead
volatilise them.
  A
electrode of the electric lamp, has a carbon point brought down upon
  On separating the one from the other, a brilliant arc containing
  The
points, but consists of a series of vivid bands, each corresponding in
belong.
brass, which is an alloy of copper and zinc, gives a spectrum made up

Not only, however, when metals are united like zinc and copper to form
  No
to form an oxide, and this again with an acid to form a salt; if the
reveal themselves with perfect definition.
cylinder of retort carbon, pure culinary salt is introduced.
carbon is made the positive electrode of the lamp, the resultant

lithium, [Footnote: The vividness of the colours of the lithium
band of indescribable splendour.
discourse, that I had mistaken strontium for lithium, as this blue
  I have obtained it many times since;
 Miller, having kindly analysed the substance made
--J.
]  and other
 When different
spectrum is obtained which contains the bands of them all.

its own system.
of the spectrum the metals which produce it.
addressed to the eye instead of the ear; and the certainty would not
'I am here!' Nor is this language affected by distance.
that the sun or the stars give us the bands of our terrestrial metals,
into their composition.
Does the solar spectrum exhibit bright lines which we might compare
identity or difference?  No.
examined, gives us a multitude of fine dark lines instead of bright
  They were first noticed by Dr.
and investigated with profound skill by Fraunhofer, and named after
  They had been long a standing puzzle to
  The bright lines yielded by metallic vapours had been
phenomena was wholly unknown, until Kirchhoff, with admirable
power to chemically analyse the sun.

  Hitherto we have been
aesthetic taste as to our scientific faculty; we have ridden
dismount and march through ashes and lava, if we would enjoy the
  Our problem is to connect the dark lines of
  The white beam of the
components are refracted in different degrees, and thus its colours

Now the colour depends solely upon the rate of oscillation of the
light by a much quicker rate, and the colours between red and blue by
  The solid incandescent coal-points give us a
periods between the two extremes of the spectrum.
you know, is to light what _pitch_ is to sound.
presses his finger on a string he makes it shorter and tighter, and

shortening it gradually as he draws his bow, the note would rise in
between note and note.
spectrum, whose colours insensibly blend together without gap or
highest.
string, to press his finger on a certain point, and to sound the
distant, and sound its note; then to another, and so on, thus sounding
the intervals of the string passed over; we should then have the exact
intervals of darkness between them.
and intelligible analogy, is not sufficient for our purpose; we must
metal.

tension, which, if the atoms are squeezed together, push them again
causing them, before coming to rest, to quiver for a certain time at a
  Now
as having its atoms united by springs all of the same tension, its
  The metal which gives us two bands
tension, and others by springs of a different tension.
are of two distinct kinds; so also when we have three or more bands we
vibrating in its own particular time and at a different rate from the
  If we seize this idea definitely, we shall have no difficulty
the forces by which the atoms act upon each other.
cleared our way, let us make another effort to advance.

  I blow against
position of rest; it swings back towards me, and when it reaches the
  It now swings further; and thus by
oscillations of large amplitude.
motion which my breath communicated to the air.
to rest.
against it, and that this wave is followed by a series of others which
obvious that these waves would communicate their motion to the ball
  And it is equally manifest
properly timed; for then the motion imparted to the pendulum by one
accumulation of effect obtained when the periods of the waves
  So much for the
  But if such a pendulum
that the waves it would produce would be of the same period as those
struck against it.
impulses ever described was that observed by a watchmaker, named
 He left two clocks leaning against the
B, not.
ticking also.
imparted by the ticking of A to the rail against which both clocks

  When, the
the reaction of B stopped A.
A stopped B.
other, but still not quite alike, the clocks mutually controlled each

But what has all this to do with our present subject?  The varied
a ray claims strict brotherhood with the vibrations of our pendulum.
Suppose aethereal waves striking upon atoms which oscillate in the
the atoms; suppose we send our beam of white light through a sodium
undulations which are synchronous with their own periods of vibration.
There will be on the part of those particular rays a transference of
which, as already defined, is absorption.

be made before a public audience.
prisms, and the spectrum spreads its colours upon the screen.
the lamp and the prism I interpose a snapdragon light.
water are here mixed with common salt, and the metal dish that holds
  The vapour from the mixture ignites
  Through this flame the beam from
 You
sufficiently so to be seen by everybody present.

  Placing in front of the electric lamp
containing a bit of sodium less than a pea in magnitude is plunged
  The sodium soon volatilises and burns with brilliant
  The beam crosses the flame, and at the same time the
intense darkness occupying its place.
brilliant yellow of the spectrum takes its proper place, while the

Let me be more precise: The yellow colour of the spectrum extends
other with the green.
indefinite.
  By dipping the
salt, and replacing it in the lamp, the bright yellow band produced by
  When the sodium flame
is obliterated, an intensely black streak occupying its place.

instead of the flame of sodium alone, we were to introduce into the
calcium, &c, are in a state of volatilisation, each metallic vapour
with the bright bands of the same metallic vapour.
electric lamp shining through such a composite flame would give us a
by the lines of Fraunhofer.

conclusive experiment, we reach the solution of one of the grandest of
  The sun consists of
  The light of the
carbon-points; but having to pass through the photosphere, as our beam
photosphere can itself emit are absorbed, and shaded spaces,

bright line in the place of every dark line of Fraunhofer.
lines are therefore not absolutely dark, but dark by an amount
intercepted by the photosphere, and the light which issues from the

The man to whom we owe this noble generalisation is Kirchhoff,
[Footnote: Now Professor in the University of Berlin.
every other great discovery, it is compounded of various elements.


 Miller gave drawings and descriptions of the
  Wheatstone, with his accustomed
the metals between which the spark passed determined the bright bands
  Masson published a prize essay on these
beautiful drawings of the spectra, obtained from the discharge of
  But none of these distinguished men betrayed the
metals and the dark lines of the solar spectrum.
nearest to the philosophy of the subject was Angstrom.
translated from Poggendorff's 'Annalen' by myself, and published in
which a body absorbs are precisely those which it can emit when
  In another place, he speaks of one of his spectra

discovery; and, for my own part, the examination of the radiation and
I placed before you at the commencement of this discourse, would have
founded, had not an accident withdrawn me from the investigation.
Kirchhoff's claims are unaffected by these circumstances.
that I have referred to formed the necessary basis of his discovery;
gravitation.
that had before been accomplished.
amid a vast assemblage of empirical observations, and has ennobled our
sublime of natural phenomena.


  ELEMENTARY MAGNETISM.


WE have no reason to believe that the sheep or the dog, or indeed any
phenomena are regulated.
birds may go to roost, and cattle return to their stalls, during a
think of enquiring into the causes of these things.
with Man.
events, the varied appearances of the universe in which he dwells
which the senses are the mere instruments and excitants.
to him either original or final.
contemplation of it alone, but endeavours to ascertain its position in
  He
sequence of something that has gone before, and as the source of a
  The notion of spontaneity, by
abandoned; the idea that nature is an aggregate of independent parts
powers become more and more manifest: until he is finally led to
sympathises with the rest, changing, it is true, from age to age, but
effect.

various to be studied first-hand by any single mind.
extends there is always a tendency to subdivide the field of
  Its various parts are taken up by different minds, and
bestowed on them if each investigator aimed at the mastery of the
  The centrifugal form in which knowledge, as a whole, advances,
of individuals, each of whom directs his efforts, more or less, along
  Accepting, in many respects, his culture from his
one direction, the student of Nature ought actually to touch his work.
He may otherwise be a distributor of knowledge, but not a creator, and
judgment, which direct and habitual contact with natural truth can

One large department of the system of Nature which forms the chief
attention this evening, is that of physics, or natural philosophy.
This term is large enough to cover the study of Nature generally, but
to our perceptions than any other.
laws of light and heat--with the phenomena and laws of magnetism and
liquids and gases, whether at rest or in a state of translation or of
  The science of mechanics is a portion of natural
attention of him who would cultivate it profoundly.
application of physics to the motions of the heavenly bodies, the
department in itself.
parts.
fall asunder.
  Through their
solar beams build up the whole vegetable world, and by it the animal
  The touch of the self-same beams causes hydrogen and chlorine
powerful acid.
  Physical
while in physics proper the laws and phenomena of the agents
of attention.

is to be studied, and how a knowledge of it is to be imparted to
  From the domain of physics, which would be unmanageable as a
  I might readily
philosophy has accomplished.
science of which we hear so much in the newspapers, and which are so
  I might, of course, ring changes
photograph, the medical applications of physics, and the various other
  That
make the study of physics the instrument of your pupil's culture; how
take root and grow in the mind, and not lie like dead lumber in the
  This is a task much heavier than the mere
own want of time to execute it aright, I might well hesitate to

But let me sink excuses, and attack the work before me.
foremost, then, I would advise you to get a knowledge of facts from
  Facts looked at directly are vital; when they
  You wish, for
a good book on the subject, if you can, but do not be content with
woodcuts; see the operations of the force yourself.
writers describe experiments which they never made, and their
clever or conscientious they may be, their written words cannot supply
  Every fact has numerous radiations,

Go, then, to a philosophical instrument maker, and give a shilling or
purchase a pair of them; or get a smith to cut a length of ten inches
smoothly, harden it, and get somebody like myself to magnetise it.
Procure some darning needles, and also a little unspun silk, which
  Make little loop
  Do it neatly.
the loop place a darning-needle, and bring the two ends or poles, as
needle.

ensue.
brass, wood, glass, ivory, or whalebone; the magnet produces no
  You thence infer a
  Multiply your
besides iron and steel, are acted upon by your magnet.
metal nickel, or of the metal cobalt, from which the blue colour used
the iron and steel.

yourself to iron and steel, which are always at hand.
experiments with the darning-needle over and over again; operate on
  Do not think
her language a certain grace and mastery, which practice can alone
  Let every movement be made with care, and avoid slovenliness,
  Experiment, as I have said, is the language by which
of this language a lack of straightforwardness is as possible, and as
  If, therefore,
the first resolve to deal with her sincerely.

along one of the ends of the magnet; resuspend it, and repeat your
  You now find that each extremity of the magnet
  The simple
force.
ends which attract and those which repel each other.

leave the latter freely suspended by its fibre.
you can from currents of air, and if you have iron buttons on your
  If
iron rods inside.
certain determinate position.
south.
  After several oscillations it
  If you have obtained your
one of its ends.
end thus marked, and that the point of your needle was the last to
eye of the needle turning towards the north.
do not take the statement on my authority.

precisely the same manner: freely suspended it also will turn its eye
  Your next step is to examine
other.

the eye-end of the former near the eye-end of the latter; the
  Make the same experiment
is repelled.
have attraction--point attracts eye, and eye attracts point.
the reciprocity of this action by removing the suspended needle, and
  You obtain the same result.
attraction, then, is mutual, and the repulsion U mutual.
thus demonstrated in the clearest manner the fundamental law of
other.
but _do it_, and your knowledge will not be confined to what I have

I have said that one end of your bar magnet has a mark upon it; lay
employ a thin silk ribbon, and form a loop large enough to hold your
  Suspend it; it turns its marked end towards the north.
marked end is that which in England is called the north pole.
common smith has made your magnet, it will be convenient to determine
  Vary your
repel your large magnet; it is quite competent to do so.
magnetising the needle, I have supposed the point to be the last to
pole.
polarity to the end of the magnet with which it, has been last in

You may perhaps learn all this in a single hour; but spend several at
you must obtain a manual aptitude in addressing Nature.
to your fellow-man you are not entitled to use jargon.
experiments are jargon addressed to Nature, and just as much to be
  Manual dexterity in illustrating the interaction of
progress; and you must not neglect attaining this power over your
  As you proceed, moreover, you will be tempted to do more
 Thoughts will occur to you which you will
answer.
people.
you will perhaps try whether the magnetic power is not to be screened
  You use plates of glass, wood, slate, pasteboard, or
  One
not present.
ships' compasses, you will not fall, as some projectors have done,
interposition of such substances.

you have thus far witnessed for yourself shall be witnessed by twenty
  And here your private ingenuity must come into
  You will attach bits of paper to your needles, so as to render
poles by different colours, say green and red.
upon your darning-needle.
vivid redness and plunge it into cold water.
rendered, in fact, almost as brittle as glass.
magnetised in the manner of the darning-needle, will be better able to
  Having secured such a strip, you proceed

half an inch, or an inch, off your magnetised darning-needle and
  The sewing-needle, or the fragment
the distribution of the magnetism in your strip of steel.
strip upright in your left hand, and cause the test-needle to approach
the other is repelled.
oscillations, which at first were quick, become slower; opposite the
attracted; above the middle the test-needle turns suddenly round, its
  Go through the experiment thoroughly:
end of the needle, while the entire upper half attracts the opposite
  Supposing the north end of your little needle to be that
magnetised strip exhibits south magnetism, while the entire upper half
  So far, then, you have determined the

You look at this fact, you think of it; in its suggestiveness the
  The thought naturally
middle?  Shall I obtain two magnets each possessing a single pole?'
you tested the whole.
succession to your test-needle, suffices to show that you have _not_ a
neutral point between them.
other halves, you will find that each quarter of the original strip

fragment may be, it still possesses two opposite poles and a neutral
  Well, your hand ceases to break where breaking
you follow the breaking process in idea when you can no longer realise
and you conclude that each atom is a magnet, and that the force
the forces of its ultimate particles.

pleasure or cause to disappear.
drawing it along the pole of a magnet; we can demagnetise it, or
the opposite direction.
wondrous change?  What is it that takes place among the atoms of the
the region of sense, and into that of imagination.
indeed, is the divining-rod of the man of science.
imagination which catches its creations from the air, but one informed
as a principle, of discerning its consequences, and of devising means
test.
phenomena--if from an assumed cause the observed acts necessarily
can not only revive at pleasure facts already known, but we can
  Thus, then, in the
imagination, and inference, are all drawn upon.
store them up; the constructive imagination broods upon these
organic whole.
the mind; and then the deductive faculty interposes to carry out the
  A perfect theory gives
partially stand the test of a comparison with facts, may be of eminent
  The
must now make ourselves familiar.

make use of a strong and vivid image.
called complementary colours; their mixture produces white.
you to imagine each of these colours to possess a self-repulsive
attracts green and green attracts red, the attraction of the

strips of wood painted with this white-; what will be their action
darning-needle, and bring the other near it; what will occur?  The red
component of your suspended strip; but then it will attract the green,
  In fact, the
each other as two unmagnetised darning-needles would be under the same

But suppose, instead of mixing the colours, we painted one half of
perfectly manifest that the two strips would now behave towards each
repel the red and attract the green, the green would repel the green
each other, we could by their mixture produce the neutrality of an
duality of action of magnetised bodies.

break one of our strips of wood in the middle we have one half
impossible to imitate the action of our broken magnet.
must we modify our conception?  We must evidently suppose _each
one.
resemble the action of a magnet.
colours of each atom could be caused to mix so as to produce white, we

For these two self-repellent and mutually attractive colours,
attractive fluids, which in ordinary steel are mixed to form a neutral
other, placing the opposite fluids on the opposite face of each
  You have then a perfectly distinct conception of the
  The strength of the magnetism
fluid decomposed.
transferred from the exciting magnet to the excited steel.
magnetisation consists in the forcible separation of two fluids which
neutralised each other by their coalescence.
magnet, after it has excited a hundred pieces of steel, you will find
words such a magnetic influence on your minds as to excite in them a
  I should rather be the
  The
magnetises.

opposed fluids spread over its opposite faces.
things be permanent?  The fluids, by hypothesis, attract each other;
across the equator of the atom, and thus neutralise each other?  To
existence of a special force, which holds the fluids asunder.
call it _coercive force_; and it is found that those kinds of steel
greatest amount of 'coercion' to tear their fluids asunder--are the
fluids, after they have been once separated.
most suited to the formation of _permanent_ magnets.
indeed, that without coercive force a permanent magnet would not be at

Probably long before this you will have dipped the end of your magnet
nail-box, and found how it drags the nails after it.
that if you are not the slaves of routine, you will have by this time
your experience beyond what I have indicated.
have caused a bit of iron to hang from the end of your magnet, and you
the first, a third to the second; until finally the force has become
  If you have operated with
with the greatest tenacity; and that a bit of iron clings more firmly
  In
many ways without any special direction from me.

one.
magnetic quality developed in it by that contact.
from the magnet its power to attract its fellow nail ceases.
however, is not necessary.
air, may exist between the magnet and the nail; the latter is still
  The
  That
magnetism of the pole which excites it; the end most remote from the
poles the nail, like the magnet, possesses a magnetic equator.

already, I doubt not, anticipated me in imagining the exact condition
  You picture the
magnetic pole, when brought near, decomposing the fluid; repelling the
thus exciting in the parts of the iron nearest to itself the opposite
  But the iron is incapable of becoming a permanent magnet.
It only shows its virtue as long as the magnet acts upon it.
then, does the iron lack which the steel possesses?  It lacks coercive
  Its fluids are separated with ease; but, once the separating
restored.
changes--able to see the fluids dividing and reuniting, according as
  Fixing a definite pole in
with reference to this pole, and be able to arouse similar pictures in
  You will cause them to place magnets and
the iron in each particular case.
have their interest immensely augmented by an acquaintance with the
  Still, while you use this theory
you will not forget to tell your pupils that it is to be regarded as a
the facts, but which does good practical service whilst we are waiting
 [Footnote: This theory breaks down when applied
  Like soft iron,
of which they are repelled; but any attempt to explain such a
futility.

a magnet, is sometimes called 'magnetisation by influence.
commonly, however, the magnetism is said to be 'induced' in the iron,
'
iron so soft as not to possess a certain amount of coercive force, and
induction.
and the quality of iron is shared in some degree by steel.
virtue of this latter fact that the unmagnetised darning-needle was
deduce the consequence that, after the steel has been magnetised, the
action.
magnet on the steel, while the attraction is assisted by the same
  Make this clear to your minds, and verify it by
  In some cases you can actually make the attraction
permanent magnetism, and thus cause two poles of the same kind
  When, however, good hard magnets
practically vanishes, and the repulsion of like poles is sensibly

I dwell thus long on elementary principles, because they are of the
cramming to neglect them.
  In
raised the needle slowly from bottom to top, and found what we called

Now does the magnet really exert no influence on the pole presented to

Let SN, fig.
north magnetism placed exactly opposite the middle of the magnet.
course this is an imaginary case, as you can never in reality thus
  But supposing us to
on n?  Your reply will of course be that the pole S attracts n while
  Let the magnitude and direction of the
direction of the repulsion by the line n o.
equally distant from s and N, the line n o, expressing the repulsion,
  Acted upon by
p, exactly midway between m n and n o.
there is no tendency of the particle n to move towards the magnetic
magnet.
particle of south magnetism opposite to the magnetic equator, it would
particles of magnetism, we place a little magnetic needle, containing
south pole being urged along n q, and its north along n p, the little

deduction.

permanent magnetism, and it will set itself exactly as the needle
  Acted upon by the magnet, the wire, as you know, becomes a
south pole towards q, just like the needle.

magnetism, and bring it nearer to one end of your magnet than to the
nearest pole of the magnet will act more powerfully on the particle
  Let SN, fig.
particle of north magnetism, in its new position.
N, and attracted by S.
and direction by the line n o, and the attraction by the shorter line
 The resultant of these two forces will be found by completing the
  Along n p, then,
action of S and N.
the same reasoning would lead to the conclusion that the particle
  If we place at n a short magnetic needle,
only position possible to the needle, thus acted on, being along the
  Verify this

In this way we might go round the entire magnet; and, considering its
accordance with ordinary mechanical principles, assign a definite
  And
the positions of both will be the same.

for yourselves, and explain to others, one of the most interesting
  Iron filings you know are
than in others.
iron filings, very small scraps of thin iron wire might be employed.
place a sheet of paper over the magnet; it is all the better if the
quite level.
sieve upon the paper, and tap the latter gently, so as to liberate the
  The magnet acts on the
embrace the magnet in a series of beautiful curves, which are
'
needle, or your suspended bit of wire, at any point of one of the
to be exactly that of the particle of iron, or of the magnetic curve,
  Go round and round the magnet; the direction of your
placed.
magnetism, if you could detach it, would move to the north pole, and a
  They are the lines along
  In the case
and the other pole in the opposite direction, the needle must
  I will not seek to
  If there be anything obscure or
thought, to be able to clear away the obscurity, to reduce the
explanation complete.
understand it; and if you are then able to look with your mind's eye
operation of those forces in the production of the magnetic curves,
vain.

  15.

them, and, by determined study, attain to clearness of conception.
Facts thus dealt with exercise an expansive force upon the intellect;
  We soon recognise a
effects which we have observed in our private chambers.
enquire, does the magnetic needle set north and south?  Evidently it
is itself a magnet.
  By means of
middle point of your magnetic needle; the needle will thus be
power of dipping' its point, or its eye, below the horizon.
bar magnet on a table, and hold the needle over the equator of the
  The needle sets horizontal.
the magnet; the south end of the needle dips, the dip augmenting as
will set itself exactly vertical.
resumes its horizontality; pass it on towards the south pole, its
becomes vertical, its north end being now turned downwards.
learn that on the one side of the magnetic equator the north end of
from nothing to 90°.
with a suitably suspended needle we shall find there the position of
  If we sail north one end of the needle dips;
terrestrial magnetic pole the needle sets vertical.
magnetic pole has not yet been found, but Sir James Ross discovered
  In this manner we establish
ordinary magnet.

ones; nor does the earth's magnetic equator quite coincide with the
  The direction of the magnetic needle in London,
the astronomical meridian, this angle being called the Declination of
  The north, pole of the needle now lies to the
  In the year
was easterly.
are gradually changing their distribution.
it is therefore called the secular change, and the observation of it
even approximately, at its laws.

magnetic power, we can turn it to account.
hold a poker formed of good soft iron.
is at this moment constraining the two fluids of the poker to
upper end a south pole.
uppermost, it attracts the north end of a magnetic needle; when
  With such a
shift their position according to the manner in which the poker is
  It has already been stated that the softest
  The earth, at this
decomposition of the neutral fluid, The component fluids may be
adhesion, which prevents them from gliding over the molecules of the
  Can we assist the earth in this case?  If we wish to remove
the powder clings, we invert the glass, tap it, loosen the hold of the
  So also
magnetic fluids to the molecules and enable the earth to pull them
  But, what is the consequence?  The portion of fluid which has
the poker has been removed from the line of dip; the iron, as you see,
  By reversing its position and tapping
  A thoughtful and competent teacher
manner which will excite their interest.
images, more or less gross, he will first give those whom he teaches
minds of his pupils become more capable of abstraction.
giving them a distinct substratum for their reasonings, he will confer
without principles, or the appeal to the bodily senses and the power

*****
As an expansion of the note on magnetic fluids, the following extract
exerts an attractive force upon a second current, flowing in the same
force exerted is a repulsive one.
Ampère was enabled to make them produce all the phenomena of
but a step to his celebrated theory of molecular currents.
supposed the molecules of a magnetic body to be surrounded by such
neutralised each other, on account of their confused grouping.
act of magnetisation he supposed to consist in setting these molecular
reduced all the phenomena of magnetism to the mutual action of

'If we reflect upon the experiments recorded in the foregoing pages
diamagnetic bodies operated on by magnetic forces possess a polarity
by magnetic bodies.
the _physical mechanism_ of this polarity?  According to Coulomb's and
decomposition of a neutral magnetic fluid; the north pole of a magnet,
soft iron submitted to its influence, draws the said fluid towards it,

altogether; according to it, indeed, the oft-used phrase, "a north
contradiction.
towards the influencing north pole, it is absurd to suppose that its
  The theory of Ampère is
particles of bismuth surrounded by molecular currents, then, according
themselves parallel to, and in the same direction as, those of the

molecular currents are not the mechanism by which diamagnetic
  The consciousness of this, I doubt not, drove
 Weber to the assumption that the phenomena of diamagnetism are
the bismuth by the magnet.
known laws, have a direction opposed to those of the inducing magnet,
  To carry out the
 Weber is obliged to suppose that the
the induced molecular currents, once excited, continue to flow without
' [Footnote: In assuming these non-resisting channels M.
Weber, it must be admitted, did not go beyond the assumptions of
]--Diamagnetism and Magne-crystallic Action, p.

********************
XVI.

[Footnote: A discourse delivered in the Royal Institution, June 6,
]
A SPHERE of lead was suspended at a height of 16 feet above the
  It was liberated, and fell by
  That weight required a second to fall to the floor from that
velocity of 32 feet a second.
earth were annihilated, and its attraction annulled, the weight would

If instead of being pulled downward by gravity, the weight be cast
must start with a velocity of 32 feet a second.
imparted to the weight by the human hand, or by any other mechanical

Now the lifting of the weight may be regarded as so much mechanical
  By means of a ladder placed against the wall, the
drawn up to this height by means of a string and pulley, or it might
  The amount of work done
would be absolutely the same.
place, and neglecting the small change of gravity with the height,
on the height to which it is lifted.
of matter m, and the height through which it is lifted h, then the
amount of work done.

impart at starting twice this velocity.
weight rise?  You might be disposed to answer, 'To twice the height;'
  Instead of twice 16, or 32 feet,
  So also, if we
height; if we quadruple the speed at starting, we attain sixteen times
  Thus, with a four-fold velocity of 128 feet a second at
  With a
height, or to an elevation of 784 feet.

effect_--other things being constant, is, as before explained,
the height, a treble velocity nine times the height, and so on, it is
the velocity.
and its velocity by v, the mechanical effect would be proportional to
  In the case considered, I have supposed the
resistance of gravity; but the same holds true if the projectile be
  If,
mechanical effect.
a projectile, and hence the philosophy of Sir William Armstrong in

The measure then of mechanical effect is the mass of the body

Now in firing a ball against a target the projectile, after collision,
  Mr.
at Shoeburyness it is a common thing to see a flash, even in broad
  And if our lead weight be

like the mechanical effect, the amount of heat generated is
velocity.
your amount of heat; double your velocity, other things remaining
  Here then we have
  When a violin
imparted to the air, and to produce that motion muscular force has
  We may here correctly say, that the mechanical force
  In a similar way we say that the
converted into heat.
continues; the motion of the mass is converted into a motion of the
nerves, produce the sensation we call heat.

can develope.
generated a quantity of heat sufficient to raise its own temperature
  It reached the earth with a
small for a rifle bullet; multiplying 0.
that the amount of heat developed by collision with the target would,

  In reality,
against which it strikes; nevertheless, it would be worth while to pay
not, under some circumstances, show signs of fusion.
years subsequently this surmise was proved correct.
Franco-German War signs of fusion were observed in the case of bullets
]
From the motion of sensible masses, by gravity and other means, we now
 A
hung in the focus of a parabolic mirror, in the focus of a second
the instant the concentrated light fell upon the balloon, the gases
 Here the atoms
enormous force of the collision.
an old experiment, but it has now a significance beyond what it used
of oxygen and coal as we regard the clashing of a falling weight
  The heat produced in both cases is referable to a
  A diamond, which burns in oxygen as a star of white
oxygen against it.
when they clash, and could we find their number and weights,
adding all together, we should get a number representing the exact

Thus far we have regarded the heat developed by the clashing of
  Work is expended in giving motion to
  But we reverse this
  We can
of mechanical power.
oxygen an amount of heat which, if mechanically applied, would suffice
 to a height of 20 miles above the
  Conversely, 100 lbs.
miles, and striking against 'the earth, would generate an amount of

  A gun which fires a
  The
is greater than that which could be obtained from the re-condensation
performed is the exact equivalent of the amount of heat lost.

84 millions of tons of coal from our pits.
force represented by this quantity of coal seems perfectly fabulous.
The combustion of a single pound of coal, supposing it to take place
suppose 108 millions of horses working day and night with unimpaired
perform an amount of work just equivalent to that which the annual

Comparing with ordinary gravity the force with which oxygen and carbon
  But let us
range.
attraction of our planet is barely sensible, and let it fall to the
  It would reach the earth with a final
body would generate about twice the amount of heat generated by the
  We have stated that by falling
three-fifths of a degree; but a body falling from an infinite distance
pulling power, when it has arrived within 16 feet of the surface; on

Let us now turn our thoughts for a moment from the earth to the sun.
The researches of Sir John Herschel and M.
of the annual expenditure of the sun as regards heat; and by an easy
falls to the share of our planet.
and heat the earth receives one.
a minute would be competent to boil 12,000 millions of cubic miles of
  How is this enormous loss made good--whence is the
combustion--no chemical affinity with which we are acquainted, would

speedily come to an end.
its combustion would only cover 4600 years of expenditure.
short time it would burn itself out.
temperature and maintain the outlay?  We have already regarded the
found that the heat generated by its collision would be twice that
  How much
The maximum velocity with which a body can strike the earth is about 7
sun is 390 miles in a second.
collision is proportional to the square of the velocity destroyed, an
about 10,000 times the quantity of heat produced by the combustion of

Have we any reason to believe that such bodies exist in space, and
through the air are small planetary bodies, drawn by the earth's
  They enter our atmosphere with planetary velocity, and by
to emit light and heat.
down upon us in great numbers.
observed in nine hours.
planetary system is limited to 'vast masses of enormous weight;' there
smaller masses, which obey the same laws as the larger ones.
lenticular envelope which surrounds the sun, and which is known to
moving as they do in a resisting medium, they must continually
  Falling into it, they would produce enormous heat,
might be made good.
continually grow larger; but how much larger?  Were our moon to fall
one or two years' loss; and were our earth to fall into the sun a
  Still, our moon and our earth, if
perception.
required effect would, during the range of history, cause no
  The augmentation of
  However this
it certainly shows how a sun _might_ be formed and maintained on known

Our earth moves in its orbit with a velocity of 68,040 miles an hour.
Were this motion stopped, an amount of heat would be developed
size as the earth 384,000 degrees of the centigrade thermometer.
has been prophesied that 'the elements shall melt with fervent heat.
The earth's own motion embraces the conditions of fulfilment; stop
would be reduced to vapour.
amount of heat developed by the shock would be equal to that developed
size.

present terrestrial conditions, which is well worthy of our attention.
Standing upon one of, the London bridges, we observe the current of
  The
consequence of this friction.
radiated into space and lost, as far as the earth is concerned.
supplies this incessant loss?  The earth's rotation.
little more closely at the matter.
earth turning like a wheel from west to east in its diurnal rotation.
Suppose a high mountain on the earth's surface approaching the earth's
forms a kind of handle by which the earth is pulled more quickly
  But when the meridian is passed the pull of the moon on the
the velocity of rotation as much as it previously augmented it; thus

meridian, the pull then would be always exerted against the earth's
corresponding to the strength of the pull.
this position_--it lies always to the east of the moon's meridian.
waters of the ocean are in part dragged as a brake along the surface
earth's rotation.
]
produce heat by the friction of the millstones; that heat has an
is turned by a mountain stream.
of the earth's rotation, the latter at the expense of the sun's

The sun, by the act of vaporisation, lifts mechanically all the
rain, and when it freezes falls as snow.
piled upon the Alpine heights, and furnishes materials for glaciers.
But the sun again interposes, liberates the solidified liquid, and
  The mechanical force of
the heat of the sun.
having been first lifted to the elevation from which it springs by the
  The energy of winds is also due entirely to the

But there is still another work which the sun performs, and its
  Trees and vegetables grow
mechanical energy.
of iron, produced by the falling together of the atoms of iron and
the falling together of carbon and oxygen.
union resemble our lead weight while resting on the earth; but we can
can be wound up and thus enabled to repeat the process of combination.
In the building of plants carbonic acid is the material from which the
tears the atoms asunder, setting the oxygen free, and allowing the
  Let the solar rays fall upon a
heat as it receives; let the same beams fall upon a forest, the
energy of a portion of the sunbeams is invested in building the trees.
Without the sun the reduction of the carbonic acid cannot be effected,
molecular work done.
Mr.
  I ignite this cotton,
of heat equal to that produced by its combustion was sacrificed by the

We cannot, however, stop at vegetable life, for it is the source,
  The sun severs the carbon
vegetable thus formed, a reunion of the severed elements takes place,
  The process of building a vegetable is one of

trace their lineage directly to the sun.

lifting of his own body by an Alpine climber up a mountain slope, are
  A man weighing 150
themselves to 15 pounds.
days, this mass of muscle would be wholly oxidised.
which do more work would be more quickly consumed: the heart, for

of food; less heat is developed by the oxidation of the same amount of
equivalent of the mechanical work accomplished by the muscles.

hand--but I am warned that you have been already kept too long.
whom then are we indebted for the most striking generalisations of
scarcely ever heard--the published labours of a German doctor, named
  Without external stimulus, and pursuing his profession as town
of the interaction of heat and other natural forces to clearness in
  And yet he is scarcely ever heard of, and even to
  Led by his own
 Joule
but in 1842 Mayer had actually calculated the mechanical equivalent of
to account.

mechanical theory of heat in the most fearless and precise manner to
  He also embraced the other natural agents in his
  In 1853 Mr.
the meteoric theory of the sun's heat, and in 1854 Professor William
of the theory; but six years previously the subject had been handled
been derived from him.
life, and the period at which he wrote, we cannot fail to be struck
  Here was a man of
and arriving at the most important results in advance of those whose
  It was the
to speculate on these subjects.
the tropics was of a brighter red than in colder latitudes, and his
where he has worked with such signal ability and success.
will desire to know what has become of this man.
alleged, gave way; it is said he became insane, and he was certainly
  In a biographical dictionary of his country
  He recovered;
Heilbronn.



While preparing for publication my last course of lectures on Heat, I
 Mayer had done in
  I accordingly wrote to two gentlemen
needed.
]  Both of them are Germans,
Theory of Heat.
Mayer's publications, and one of them [Clausius] was so friendly as to
  This friend, in
should not find anything very important in Mayer's writings; but
  His letter
the statement in my last letter, that you would not find much matter
beautiful and correct thoughts which they contain;' and he goes on to
had anticipated other eminent writers.
publications the name of Mayer repeatedly occurs, and whose papers
was, on the 10th of last month, unacquainted with the thoughtful and
Himmels,' and in 1854, when Professor William Thomson developed in so
certainly not aware of the existence of that essay, though from a
of it.
physiologists--by Dr.
recognition.
of the man, partly from physicists and partly from physiologists; but
have been had he chosen a happier mode of publication.
a greater disservice could be done to a man of science, than to
disadvantage of him in whose interest it is made.
opportunities, achievements, and fate are taken into account, I do not
that honourable position, which I believe to be his due.

will correct any error of judgment into which I may have fallen
  'Bemerkungen ueber die Kraefte der unbelebten
 42, p.
Bewegung in ihrem Zusammenhange mit dem Stoffwechsel,' Heilbronn,
'Bemerkungen ueber das Mechanische Equivalent der Waerme,' Heilbronn,

====================
IN MEMORIAM.
 Julius Robert Mayer died at Heilbronn on March 20,
  It gives me pleasure to reflect that the great
first virtually assigned to him in the foregoing discourse.
subsequently hosen by acclamation a member of the French Academy of
Highest reward.
479.



At the meeting of the British Association at Glasgow in 1876--that is
publication--the foregoing lecture was made the cloak for an unseemly
  The anger which found this
in opposition to him and a more eminent colleague, the position which
 Mayer.
Magazine' for this and the succeeding years.
Tait denied to Mayer all originality, and he has since, I regret to say,
claims.
summarily disposes of this detraction, to which its object, during his

Some time ago Professor Tait published a volume of lectures entitled
evoked an amount of censure far beyond that hitherto publicly
  Many of the best heads on the continent of Europe agree in
book.
by Du Bois-Reymond, the celebrated Perpetual Secretary of the Academy
  Du Bois-Reymond's address was on 'National
"Lectures" is not, perhaps, sufficiently well acquainted with the
of which he passes so unreserved (schroff) a judgment.
exposes himself to the suspicion--which, unhappily, is not weakened by
occasionally runs away with him, converting him for the time into a
  Scientific Chauvinism,' adds the learned
is more reprehensible (gehaessig) than political Chauvinism, inasmuch
science, than from the politically excited mass.
delivered before the Academy of Sciences of Berlin, in celebration of
]
In the case before this 'expectation' would, I fear, be doomed to
  But Du Bois-Reymond and his countrymen must not
of England.
itself free from scientific Chauvinism.
presenting the Copley medal to Arago, scornfully brushed aside that
free domain of science, chivalry towards foreigners has been a guiding

On the more private amenities indulged in by Professor Tait, I do not

********************
XVII.

[Footnote: A discourse delivered at the Royal Institution, March 18,
Radiation.

exist among gaseous bodies both as regards their power of absorbing
change of aggregation.
liquid congealed to a solid, the molecules coalesce, and grapple with
is maintained.
luminiferous aether still surrounds the molecules: hence, if the acts
their state of aggregation, the change from the gaseous to the liquid

force of cohesion be of paramount influence, then we may expect that
different from that of the vapours from which they are derived.

exhaustive examination of this question.
were employed, and five different layers of each, varying in thickness
02 of an inch to 0.
  The liquids were enclosed,
incident heat, but between plates of transparent rock-salt, which only
  The source of heat throughout these
incandescence by an electric current of unvarying strength.
quantities of radiant heat absorbed and transmitted by each of the
  The
vapour employed being rendered proportional to the quantities of
  The result was that,
of their vapours proved absolutely the same.
exception to this law; so that, to determine the position of a vapour
position of its liquid.

as the liquid stage is concerned, is of altogether subordinate
importance in molecular physics.
it has a special bearing.
and radiator determine that of its vapour, the position of water fixes
  Water has been compared with other liquids in
and as an absorbent, to transcend them all.
layer of bisulphide of carbon 0.
per cent, and allows 94 per cent of the radiation from the red-hot
per cent.
per cent, and alcohol, as an absorber of radiant heat, stands at the
  The exception is water.
this substance, of the thickness above given, absorbs 81 per cent, and
  of the radiation to pass through it.
single experiment ever been made upon the vapour of water, its
deportment of the liquid.

of the radiating and absorbing substances was next briefly considered.
For the first six substances in the list of liquids examined, the
compound molecule augments.
chloroform 5, iodide of ethyl 8, benzol 12, and amylene 15 atoms in
  The order of their power as radiants and
feeblest, and amylene the strongest of the six.
excels benzol as an absorber, though it has but 9 atoms in its
complex by the introduction of a new element.
and hydrogen, while alcohol contains carbon, hydrogen and oxygen.
Thus, not only does atomic _multitude_ come into play in absorption and
  I would
water; the deportment of this substance towards radiant heat being
be correct.

limits of the red end of the solar spectrum, rays of high heating
  The discovery is
  Dissolving iodine in the bisulphide of carbon,
brilliant flames, while to the ultra-red rays of such flames the same
  The transparent
it the same absorption as the perfectly opaque solution.
prism filled with the opaque liquid being placed in the path of the
intercepted, but the heat spectrum may be received upon a screen and
  Falling upon a thermo-electric pile, its invisible
galvanometer.

regards light and radiant heat?  The visible rays of the spectrum
  The sensation of
than the non-visual waves which fall beyond 'the extreme red.
should iodine stop the former and allow the latter to pass?  The
those whose periods of recurrence coincide with the periods of
  The
definite periods, and, when these periods synchronise with those of
  Briefly defined, then,
discord, while opacity is synonymous with accord, between the periods
impinge.

transparency to the dissonance existing between the oscillating
spectrum.
general discord of the vibrating periods of their atoms with the
synchronism with the ultra-red periods is to be inferred from their
  Water illustrates this in a most
  It is highly transparent to the luminous rays, which
excite vision.
which proves the synchronism of its vibrating periods with those of

If, then, to the radiation from any source water shows itself
radiation emanates oscillate in ultra-red periods.
test to the radiation from a flame of hydrogen.
mainly of incandescent aqueous vapour, the temperature of which, as
radiant heat, as generally supposed, augment with the temperature of
copiously transmitted by water.
bisulphide of carbon 0.
cent.
examined transmits more or less of the heat, a layer of water of the
flame.
cold water and those of aqueous vapour at a temperature of 3259°C.
the periods of water have already been proved to be ultra red--hence
 The
to incandescence by electricity is insensible, while that by the
  Substituting for the platinum
insensible, while that of the undried air rises to 20 per cent.
the entire radiation.
stated, 3259°C; that of the aqueous vapour of the air 20°C.
then, the temperature of aqueous vapour to rise from 20°C.
we must conclude that the augmentation of temperature is applied to an
of quicker periods into the radiation.

wonderful than has been hitherto supposed.
of the earth the actinic and luminous rays of the sun must penetrate
transparent.
with freedom.
terrestrial rays must be checked in their transit towards stellar
the air.
temperature, bringing its extremes into proximity, and obviating

radiation from aqueous vapour is intercepted, in a special degree, by
for it follows from this that the very act of nocturnal refrigeration
the earth--giving, as it were, a varnish of water to that
which disqualifies it from passing through the earth's atmosphere and

And here we come to a question in molecular physics which at the
  By allowing the violet and
other substances Professor Stokes has changed the periods of those
  Attempts have been made to produce a similar result at the
periods competent to excite vision--but hitherto without success.
a change of period, I agree with Dr.
the limelight is produced by an oxy-hydrogen flame.
experiment there is an actual breaking up of long periods into short
  The change of
firstly, by its being in the opposite direction--that is, from a lower
the lime is heated by the collision of the molecules of aqueous
  But it cannot
the same periods, provided the motion of the aether could be rendered
 [Footnote: This was soon afterwards
  See the section on 'Transmutation of Rays'.
effect in principle is the same, whether we consider the lime to be
or by a particle of aether oscillating at the same rate.

and thus introduce shorter periods into the radiation.
already stated, are in discord with the atomic vibrations of water;
rendered more copious by the introduction of the wire into the flame.
Experiment proves this conclusion to be true.
opaque, opens a passage to 6 per cent.
spiral.
cent.
and spiral are employed, 78 per cent.

For an alcohol flame Knoblauch and Melloni found glass to be less
it; but Melloni afterwards showed that the result was not
diathermic to the radiation from the pure alcohol flame.
not explain this, but the reason is now obvious.
owe their blackness to the carbon diffused through them.
as first proved by Melloni, is in some measure transparent to the
and 50 per cent.
layer of carbon which intercepted the light of an intensely brilliant
  The products of combustion of alcohol are carbonic acid and
  For
transparent, while for the radiation from the platinum spiral, it is
 The platinum wire, therefore, which
absorption of the black glass and mica.

coincidence could be adduced than that furnished by the radiation from
 Here the product of combustion is carbonic
acid of the atmosphere exerts a powerful effect.
gas, only one-thirtieth of an atmosphere in density, contained in a
 of the
 For the heat emitted by
acid; in fact, for such heat, with one exception, carbonic acid is the
 Moreover,
the absorbent power of carbonic acid, while for the radiation from the
absorption by carbonic acid is more than twice that of olefiant gas.
Thus we establish the coincidence of period between carbonic acid at a
 and carbonic acid at a temperature of over
cold gas belonging to the ultra-red portion of the spectrum.

impossible it is to determine the effect of temperature pure and
heat be employed.
atoms ought to be retained.
by an electric current, the temperature meanwhile varying between the
 Their comparative opacity to the ultra-red
vapours referred to at the commencement of this lecture with those of
 Hence, by gradually heating a platinum wire
discord between it and these vapours, and thus augment the
 Experiment entirely confirms this conclusion.
nether, for example, absorbs 45 per cent.
platinum spiral heated to barely visible redness; 32 per cent.
radiation from the same spiral at a red heat; 26 per cent.
radiation from a white-hot spiral, and only 21 per cent.
spiral is brought near its point of fusion.
inversion as to transparency also occur.
formic aether is more opaque than sulphuric; for a bright red heat
for a higher temperature, sulphuric aether is more opaque than formic.
This result gives us a clear view of the relationship of the two
 As we introduce waves of
that is to say, its accord with the shorter waves is greater than that
 Hence we may infer that the atoms of formic aether

When the source of heat is a Leslie's cube coated with lampblack and
with sulphuric is very decided.
chloroform and iodide of methyl are inverted.
the absorption of chloroform vapour being 10 per cent, that of iodide
chloroform is 22 per cent, while that by the iodide of methyl is only
  This inversion is not the result of temperature merely; for when
employed as a source, the iodide continues to be the most powerful
  All the experiments hitherto made go to prove that from
especial manner with chloroform.
lampblack, the absorption by chloroform is more than three times that
portion of a gas-flame the absorption by chloroform is also
flame of a Bunsen's burner, from which the incandescent carbon
bisulphide of carbon is nearly twice that by chloroform.
of the carbon particles more than doubles the relative transparency of
  Testing, moreover, the radiation from various parts
the bisulphide of carbon was most opaque, while for all other parts of
  For the radiation from a
the bisulphide was also most opaque, and its opacity very decidedly
of bisulphide of carbon.
coated with isinglass with that from a similar cube coated with
of eleven vapours, all but one absorbed the radiation from the

It is worthy of remark that whenever, through a change of source, the
position of the liquid from which the vapour was derived underwent a

It is still a point of difference between eminent investigators
or not.
  A long series of experiments
of 100°C.
  The heat emitted by
and the heat emitted by cloth, or paper, differs from both.
also a subject of discussion whether rock-salt is equally diathermic
some investigators being ascribed by others to differences of
  MM.
and Desains maintain the former view, Melloni and M.
maintain the latter.
but the temperature of the source; its size, distance, and
  The experiments proved rock-salt to
  It is more opaque, for example, to the
one.

radiation, internal as well as external, as the communication of
fair theoretic reasoning, reach the conclusion that the best radiators
  A broad consideration of the
observed facts.
are also extremely bad conductors.
to their compounds we pass from good conductors to bad ones, and from
  Water, among liquids, is probably the
  Silver, among solids, is
  The excellent
 de la Provostaye and Desains furnish a striking
those atoms which transfer the greatest amount of motion to the
competent to communicate motion to each other, or, in other words, to

********************
XVIII.

1870.

Dr.

father was a smith; that he was born at Newington Butts in 1791; that
load of brown curls upon his head and a packet of newspapers under his
man, who became attached to the little fellow, and in due time made
found his appetite for knowledge provoked and strengthened by the
  Thus he grew in wisdom and stature to
a writer of letters, which reveal his occupation, acquirements, and
  His correspondent was Mr.
Society of Friends, who, with a forecast of his correspondent's

In later years Faraday always carried in his pocket a blank card, on
  He made
  This
 To
before the old one had been exhaustively discussed, Faraday objects.
'Your notion,' he says, 'I can hardly allow, for the following
lost for want of noting at the time.
to have his own way, and he had it throughout his life.
of opinion sometimes arose between the two friends, and then they
  'I accept your offer to fight it out
hope, pleasure.
checks it.
self-restraint.
'correctness' of conduct; but his overflowing affections prevented
  The habit of self control became a second nature to

In October 1812 he was engaged by a Mr.
bookbinder; but the situation did not suit him.
have been an austere and passionate man, and Faraday was to the last
  All his life he continued so.
from dejection; and a certain grimness, too, pervaded his moods.
present,' he writes to Abbott, 'I am as serious as you can be, and
repugnance it might give rise to.
should have refrained from writing to you, did I not conceive from the
occupied upon serious subjects to the exclusion of those that are
'  Plainly he had fallen into that stern Puritan mood, which
but is often a cause of disturbed digestion to his friends.

quitted him and bookbinding together.
lectures, and written to him, entreating to be released from Trade,
  Davy recognised the
offered, drove to his door and sent in a letter, offering him the post
  He was
from beet-root.
been founded by Mr.
  'The discipline was very sturdy,
' Faraday
  In the laboratory
  Both Davy and himself were at
nitrogen.
away a part of one nail, and make my fingers so sore that I cannot use
' In another experiment 'the tube and receiver were blown
hand.
the pump and exhausted, it stood for a moment, and then exploded with
  Both Sir H.
time the best.
 had his face cut in two places about the chin,
thickness of silk and leather.
out the eye of Dulong.

quality which, compounded with his rare intellectual power, made
  This was his desire to see
  He
superiority of the organ of vision.
that he could never fully understand an experiment until he had seen
  But he did not confine himself to experiment.
teacher, and reflected and wrote upon the method of scientific
  'A lecturer,' he observes, 'should appear easy and
should evince respect for his audience.
afterwards in great part embodied by himself.
'unconcern,' but his fearlessness was often manifested.
rise within him as a wave, which carried both him and his audience
  On rare occasions also, when he felt himself and his
recklessness of thought, and, without halting to extricate his
which he had unwittingly led them; thus saving them from ennui by the
share nor comprehend.


interesting extracts have been made by Dr.
  Davy was
impose on Faraday duties which he disliked.
reverse.
treatment, and was often on the point of returning home.
at Geneva.
writings in the 'Bibliothéque Britannique,' had been the first to make
  He welcomed Davy to his
  Both were sportsmen, and they often went
  On these occasions Faraday charged Davy's gun
  Once the Genevese philosopher found
entered into conversation with the young man.
person possessing such a charm of manner and such high intelligence
  On enquiry De la Rive was somewhat shocked
laboratory of the Royal Institution; and he immediately proposed that
their meals.
wife, objected; but an arrangement was come to that Faraday
  Rumour states
  This is a
kindness of the friend who saw his merit when he was a mere _garcon de
 [Footnote: While confined last autumn at Geneva by the
forget, did all that friendship could suggest to render my captivity
  M.
of which the foregoing is a condensed abstract.
of Dr.
  The rumour of a banquet
the Faraday of later years.

  Here he helped Davy for
Philosophical Society.
damage to his natural force, earnestness, and grace of delivery.
was never pledged to theory, and he changed in opinion as knowledge
  With him life was growth.
him say, 'In knowledge, that man only is to be contemned and despised
'  And again: 'Nothing is more
is there anything more adverse to its accuracy than fixity of
' Not that he was wafted about by every wind of doctrine; but
  In striking contrast
this is a subject which cannot be discussed here.

charm than those of Faraday to his wife.
 Bence Jones
character, and what can be made known can scarcely fail to charm every
' Abbott
thereabouts, the passion was potential merely.
indeed contains entries which show that he took pleasure in the
links in his destiny.
with one who inspired him with a feeling which only ended with his
  His biographer has given us the means of tracing the varying
  They reveal more than the common
flesh might melt and that he might become nothing; at another he is
  The impetuosity of his character was then
years.
its advance, suggesting, as it did, to the conscientious mind of Miss

his heaven clearer, until at length he was able to say, 'Not a
  Everything was
she was so.
elevating confidence took its place.
writes to her in a subsequent letter, 'to convey most perfectly my
this world I am yours?  Assuredly he made his profession good, and no
relations to his wife.
steadier love.
six-and-forty years, its white and smokeless glow.

throughout as his friend.
between them, which, while it lasted, must have given Faraday intense
  It is impossible to doubt the honesty of conviction with which
 Bence Jones, and there may be
his opinion that Davy in those days had become jealous of Faraday.
This, which is the prevalent belief, is also reproduced in an
' But the
light to me.

In 1820, Oersted of Copenhagen made the celebrated discovery which
acute mind of Wollaston perceived that a wire carrying a current ought

laboratory of the Royal Institution.
moment, but he came in immediately afterwards and heard the
  He had also
 Wollaston would eventually succeed.

  In the autumn of the same year Faraday wrote a
which he described.
succeeded in causing a wire, carrying an electric current, to rotate
  This was not the result sought by Wollaston,

The strong tendency of Faraday's mind to look upon the reciprocal
we, who know this, should be justified in concluding that, even had
  But
carefully exclude from our thoughts and feelings that noble subsequent
of anything unfair.
in the place of his, or to credit him with data which he could not
  Rumour and fact had connected the name of Wollaston
  When,
without any allusion to Wollaston, general, though really ungrounded,
  I say ungrounded because, firstly, Faraday's
published it, had actually called upon Wollaston, and not finding him

In December, Faraday published a second paper on the same subject,
omitted.
ideas had been appropriated without acknowledgment, and it is plain
hurt.
  'I hear,' writes
sounds, which, though only whispers to me, are, I suspect, spoken
' He might have written explanations and
  He wished to see the

  He saw
that it was the irresistible candour and truth of character which
that disarmed resentment at the time.

  In the
substance once believed to be the element chlorine, but proved by Davy
  The analysis was looked
hydrate in a closed glass tube.
decomposed, and one of the products of decomposition was proved by
  On the day of
 Paris.
being informed of it, instantly liquefied another gas in the same way.
Having struck thus into Faraday's enquiry, ought he not to have left
  But, considering
submit, may be excused for thinking differently.
always wise enough to see that his son has ceased to be a boy, and
discern that Faraday had passed the mere assistant stage, and become a
  It is now hard to avoid magnifying this error.
Faraday died or ceased to work at this time, or had his subsequent
anybody now dream of ascribing jealousy to Davy?  Assuredly not.
should he be jealous?  His reputation at this time was almost without
  He had added to his other
seven years, his language to him was this: 'It gives me great pleasure
that you will not only do something good and honourable for yourself,
' This is not the language of jealousy, potential
  But the chlorine business introduced irritation and anger,
election of Faraday to the Royal Society is, I am persuaded, to be

These matters are touched upon with perfect candour, and becoming
 Bence Jones; but in 'society'
  Here a name of noble intellectual
willingly scatter for ever.
of his position, are too great and absolute to need as a foil the
  Brothers in intellect, Davy and Faraday,
were too unlike.
Faraday the inner consciousness that he had fairly won renown.
were both proud men.
outer world; while with Faraday it became a steadying and dignifying
  In one great particular they agreed.
could have turned his science to immense commercial profit, but
  The noble excitement of research, and the
  I commend them to the
  They
to point with just pride to the possession of such men.


was to be father to the man.
steadily in knowledge and in power.
relation of Action to Reaction was ever present to Faraday's mind.
had been fostered by his discovery of Magnetic Rotations, and it
  Magnetism he knew
its turn, ought to be capable of evolution by magnetism.
29, 1831, his experiments on this subject began.
fortified by previous trials, which, though failures, had begotten
  He, like every strong
the inner light, education, and expansion.
a constant illustration.
a multitude of the most wonderful and unexpected phenomena.
generated currents by currents; currents by magnets, permanent and

as a challenge to the best scientific intellects of Europe, now fell
  It proved to be a beautiful, but still special,

had previously been achieved.

differences and resemblances revealed.
their substantial identity.
striking illustrations of the influence of Fusion on Conducting Power.
Renouncing professional work, from which at this time he might have
momentum into his researches.
Electrochemistry.
thick umbrage of novel facts; but he finally emerged from his
Decomposition in his hands.
may be ranked with that of the pile by Volta, this new discovery, may
Chemistry.
Induction, and Mode of Propagation.
principle of Inductive Capacity; and, turning to theory, he asked
 Are
medium?  If the former, then, like gravity, they will act in straight
corner.
experiments proved the fact of curvilinear propagation, and hence the
  Others denied this; but none can deny the
 [Footnote:
1857, Werner Siemens accepts and develops Faraday's theory of
]  The first volume of the Researches contains all

Faraday had heard it stated that henceforth physical discoveries would
needed only to work deductively.
crop out from time to time in our day.
acquaintance with the nature, present condition, and prospective
  The tendency of natural
dominion of mechanical laws; to give them, in other words,
  But our approach to this result is
human race--Nature will find room for both the philosophical
  Faraday entered his protest
'Experimental Researches in Electricity.
and three volumes of them have been published.
reference, he numbered every paragraph, the last number being 3362.
1859 he collected and published a fourth volume of papers, under the
' Thus did
office.

Electricity of the Gymnotus; on the Source of Power in the Voltaic
in which the phenomena and principles of Sir William Armstrong's
Magnetic Rotations, and Faraday's letters in relation to the
  The contribution of most permanent value
  By it the
necessity of chemical action to the maintenance of the current

The third volume of the Researches opens with a memoir entitled 'The
Force.
title; but the discovery of the rotation of the plane of polarisation,
  The writings
excellent electrodynamic measurements of Wilhelm Weber, which are
conjunction with his lamented friend Kohlrausch--above all, the
Light--point to that wonderful and mysterious medium, which is the
magnetic and electric phenomena.
first raised by the discovery here referred to.
addressed to me by Professor Weber on March 18 last contains the
einer solchen Combination ist durch Faraday's Entdeckung der
zuerst, und sodann durch die Uebereinstimmung derjenigen
Einheit zur lectro-statischen ausdrueckt, mit der Geschwindigkeit
welche zur erwirklichung dieser Hoffnung gemacht worden sind, das von
'] Faraday himself seemed to
  He felt that there
  He predicted that it would
  This it has done; this it
  Its right interpretation will probably mark an epoch in

Rapidly following it is the discovery of Diamagnetism, or the
  Brugmans had shown that bismuth
  Here he stopped.
antimony did the same.
  Seebeck, Becquerel, and
  These fragmentary gleams excited
independently alighted on the same facts; and, instead of stopping,
  The value
forth; and it was Faraday's good fortune to strike such lodes of
our age.

from beginning to end of these volumes; a union of ardour and
it, till defeat was final or victory assured.
or the other was necessary to his peace of mind.
investigation is perhaps incommunicable; it depends on the individual
researches are pointed to as merely illustrative of the power of the
  The brain may be filled with that philosophy;
with him were personal and distinctive, we should never rise to the
  His power is that of individual genius,
expressing itself after its own fashion, and acknowledging no mediator

The second volume of the 'Life and Letters,' like the first, is a
scientific and social relations.
Herschel, Hachette, De la Rive, Dumas, Liebig, Melloni, Becquerel,
Napoleon, and many other distinguished men.
pleasure a letter from Sir John Herschel, in reply to a sealed packet
pleased.
which spring up in the minds of fertile investigators:
'Go on and prosper, "from strength to strength," like a victor
no voice will join more heartily in the peans that already begin to
to yourself, than that of J.
  W.
'
Faraday's behaviour to Melloni in 1835 merits a word of notice.
young man was a political exile in Paris.
applied the thermo-electric pile, and had obtained with it results of
  But they were not appreciated.
sickness of disappointed hope Melloni waited for the report of the
Primier.
Chimie.
once their extraordinary merit, obtained for their author the Rumford
  A sum of money always accompanies this
than the mark of honour to the young refugee.
boundless:
'Et vous, monsieur,' he writes to Faraday, 'qui appartenez à une
peine de nom; vous n'avez pas demandé si j'avais des ennemis faibles
pour l'opprimé étranger, pour celui qui n'avait pas le moindre droit à
favorablement par des collègues consciencieux!  Je reconnais bien là
de la science d'un pays libre et généreux.

give even the slenderest summary of Faraday's correspondence, or to
  His
pension, illustrate his uncompromising independence.
Minister had offended him, but assuredly the apology demanded and
  I think 'it certain that, notwithstanding the
 Bence Jones,
revealed.
of the press with great dignity.
either directly or indirectly furnished the matter of those attacks,
  The Hon.
proved herself Faraday's ardent friend, and it was she who had healed
  She manifestly
defence, and there is a flavour of resentment in one of her letters to
  No doubt Faraday had good grounds for his

In 1841 his health broke down utterly, and he went to Switzerland with
  His bodily vigour soon revived, and he
mountaineer.
many beautiful and touching allusions.
of the Jungfrau, the blue rifts of the glaciers, and the noble Niesen
which I have elsewhere quoted: 'Clout-nail making goes on here rather
  I
  My father was
' This is from his journal; but he is unconsciously speaking

His description of the Staubbach, Giessbach, and of the scenic effects
  But amid it all,
is from within, not from without.
under a slab of gneiss on the glacier of the Aar.
at the Grimsel, and arranged with him an excursion to the 'Hôtel des

From the Fort of Ham, in 1843, Faraday received a letter addressed to
  He read this letter to me
Emperor, to turn modern science to account, has often reminded me of
  At the age of thirty-five the prisoner of Ham speaks of
which science owes to Faraday; and he asks a question which reveals
to give to a voltaic battery, in order to produce a spark capable of
necessity arise, the French Emperor will not lack at the outset the
learn the magnitude of the resources we are now neglecting amid the
' [Footnote: The 'science' has since been applied,
thoroughly than the Emperor of the French.
think, have improved the time since the above words were written
]
One turns with renewed pleasure to Faraday's letters to his wife,
  Here surely the loving essence of the
 From the house of Dr.
Percy, in Birmingham, he writes thus:
'Here--even here the moment I leave the table, I wish I were with you
  Oh, what happiness is ours!  My runs into the world in this
'
And again:
'We have been to a grand conversazione in the town-hall, and I have
happiest thing that I can do.
with you.
words aloud as I write them.


wife to enjoy the sunset; for to me who love scenery, of all that I
  A
'
Of the numberless lights thrown upon him by the Life and Letters,'
  In a letter to Lady Lovelace, he
Christians, known, if known at all, as _Sandemanians_, and our hope is
' He adds: 'I do not think it
together, and in my intercourse with my fellow-creatures, that which
distinct things.
and his science acted indirectly as the safeguard of his faith.
his investigations so filled his mind as to leave no room for
philosophy, the creed of his youth.
and hereditary.
tremors of his brain; and, however its outward and visible form might
constituents--awe, reverence, truth, and love.

a teacher, would be likely to regard our present discussions on the
  Faraday would be a 'secularist' were he now
  He had no sympathy with those who contemn knowledge unless it
  A lecture delivered before the City
expresses the views regarding education which he entertained to the
 'First, then,' he says, 'all theological
remarks; and whatever I may say has no reference to a future state, or
it.
but I wish to take that part of human nature which is independent of
  Morality, philosophy, commerce, the various institutions and
with or without it.
the breasts of those who, from opinion, are entirely opposed in the
have none.

have no right to judge religious opinions; but the human nature of
  And
perhaps be called--will accord with what I have before described as
'
In an old journal I find the following remarks on one of my earliest
  He, his

  But I should
  I act thus
motives, as some imagine.
  I am almost ashamed to
"  In the language of Scripture, it
sent the Spirit of His Son, and who with absolute trust asked a
  We dined on roast beef, Yorkshire pudding,
and of his habit of keeping himself free from the distractions of
  He was bright and joyful--boy-like, in fact, though he is
  His work excites admiration, but contact with him
  Here, surely, is a strong man.
strength; but let me not forget the example of its union with modesty,
'
Faraday's progress in discovery, and the salient points of his
extracts published in the volumes before us.
labours of the biographer final.
reconstruction.
requisite strength, knowledge, and solvent power, will, I doubt not,
and send through them, with less of interruption, the currents of
  'He was too good a man,' writes his present
for me to understand thoroughly.
affection to which we owe the discovery, selection, and arrangement of
mere literary skill.
times to reproduce the real though unobtrusive grandeur, the purity,
his chief treasury already provided for him by Dr.
labour of love.


  THE COPLEY MEDALIST OF 1870.

which might possibly compete with steam.
as Manchester, attempts to investigate and apply this power were
  This is shown by the scientific literature of the time.
Among others Mr.
up the subject, and, in a series of papers published in Sturgeon's
attempts at the construction and perfection of electro-magnetic
  The spirit in which Mr.
revealed in the following extract: 'I am particularly anxious,' he
forestall the monopolising designs of those who seem to regard this
speculation.
electro-magnetic attractions, and in 1840 he announced the important
by an electro-magnet and a mass of annealed iron, is directly
while the attraction exerted between, an electro-magnet and the pole
current.
a little subsequently to, the celebrated enquiries of Henry, Jacobi,

On December 17, 1840, Mr.
paper on the production of heat by Voltaic electricity.
announced the law that the calorific effects of equal quantities of
the current, whatever may be the length, thickness, shape, or
to the square of the quantity of transmitted electricity.
law of primary importance.
declined by, the Royal Society, he confirmed this law by new
  He also executed experiments
electrolytes, and found, in all cases, that the heat evolved by the
the intensity of that current, multiplied by the resistance to
  From this law he deduced a number of

It was during these enquiries, which are marked throughout by rare
quantitative relations between Mechanical Energy and Heat arose and
  In 1843 Mr.
meeting of the British Association at Cork a.
Effects of Magneto-Electricity, and on the Mechanical Value of Heat.
Even at the present day this memoir is tough reading, and at the time
  This, I
 Joule not to
  But its drift and results are
subsequently: 'In that paper it was demonstrated experimentally, that
converted into the heat evolved by the passage of the currents of
power of the electromagnetic engine is obtained at the expense of the
worked.
 Mag.
]  It is needless to dwell

Considering the imperfections incidental to a first determination, it
the different series of experiments published in 1843, varied widely
  The lowest limit was 587, and the highest 1,026
  of temperature.

time by Mr.
the heat actually converted into useful effect in the steam-engine.
The thoughts of the celebrated Julius Robert Mayer, who was then
the same groove; but to his labours due reference will be made on a
 [Footnote: See the next Fragment.
referred to, Mr.
evolved during the passage of water through narrow tubes; and he
figure remarkably near the one now accepted.
regarding the origin and convertibility of animal heat strikingly
 Joule, and his mastery of
  A friend had mentioned to
friction of the blood in the veins and arteries.
unquestionable,' writes Mr.
friction; but it must be understood that the mechanical force expended
venous blood to unite with oxygen, so that the whole heat of the
  But if the
mountain, I apprehend that in proportion to the muscular effort put
by a given chemical action would be experienced.
memorable passage, written, it is to be remembered, in 1843, are Mr.
Joule's own.

illustrates his insight and precision, regarding the nature of
  'I had,' he writes, 'endeavoured to prove
which would have been evolved by the electrical current due to the
intensity of the chemical force causing the atoms to combine.
venture to state more explicitly, that it is not precisely the
the atoms in falling towards one another, which determines the
evolved; so that we have a simple hypothesis by which we may explain
which indeed we may account "latent heat" as a mechanical power,
  Suppose, for
 of oxygen and 1 lb.
were presented to one another in the gaseous state, and then exploded;
  in 60,000 lbs.
water, indicating a mechanical force, expended in the combination,
 raised to the height of one
  Now if the oxygen and hydrogen could be presented to each other
because the atoms in combining would fall through less space.
words of mine are needed to point out the commanding grasp of
implied by this statement.

experiments aimed at establishing, Mr.
results presenting such discrepancies as those above referred to.
resorted in 1844 to entirely new methods, and made elaborate
expansion: firstly, against a pressure, and therefore performing work;
 He
work done.
different mechanical equivalents, the agreement between them being far
  The mean of them
  From experiments with water agitated by a

paddle-wheel, determined their elevation of temperature, and the
  From the one he derived an
6 foot-pounds; from the other an equivalent of 782.
foot-pounds.
8

By this time the labours of the previous ten years had made Mr.
completely master of the conditions essential to accuracy and success.
Bringing his ripened experience to bear upon the subject, he executed
experiments on the friction of mercury, and 20 experiments on the
  He deduced from these experiments
the world as 'Joule's equivalent.

are most highly praised when they are most simply stated.
the labours of Mr.
  They constitute the experimental foundation
still more to the philosophy of Science.
nothing more important than the theory, of which Mr.
experimental demonstrator, has been enunciated.

Mr.
  Nor have I alluded to
William Thomson.
that, in conferring upon Mr.
Society, the Council paid to genius not only a well-won tribute, but
 [Footnote:
bestowing an annual pension of 200 pounds on Dr.
]
********************
XX.

DR.
 In
there observed that the venous blood of some of his patients had a
  The observation riveted his attention;
the colour was due to the fact that a less amount of oxidation
in a cold one.
visible sign of the energy of the oxidation.

to minds prepared for them, have often led to great discoveries.
Mayer's attention was thereby drawn to the whole question of animal
  Lavoisier had ascribed this heat to the oxidation of the food.
'One great principle,' says Mayer, 'of the physiological theory of
yields, by its perfect combustion, the same amount of heat; that this
body, notwithstanding all its enigmas and wonders, is incompetent to
'
But beyond the power of generating internal heat, the animal organism
  A blacksmith, for example,
to its point of ignition.
axiom that the living body cannot create heat out of nothing, 'we are
generated within and without that is to be regarded as the true
'
From this, again, he inferred that the heat generated externally must
 For,
possible, by the mere alteration of the apparatus, to generate
that the oxidation of the same amount of material would sometimes
  'Hence,' says
postulate of the physiological theory of combustion.

himself, of the course of thought started by his observation in Java.
But the conviction once formed, that an unalterable relation subsists
express it numerically.
having raised itself to clearness on this important point, should push
  At
had become physician to the town of Heilbronn, and the duties of his
enquiry.
accident, and in the spring of 1842 wrote to Liebig, asking him to
accomplished.
 Mayer's first paper is contained

Mayer had reached his conclusions by reflecting on the complex
state definitely the physical principles on which his physiological
 He begins, therefore, with the forces of
  He finds in the universe two systems of causes
the different forms of force.
be indestructibility.
from nothing.
  In the
of potential and dynamic energy, illustrating his point by a weight
actually falling to the earth.
where motion is apparently destroyed, without producing other motion;
 Under what form does
can help us here.
force expended in overcoming friction.
disappears; but heat is generated, and the quantity generated is the
  'Our locomotives,' he observes
the heat beneath the boiler passes into the motion of the train, and

A numerical solution of the relation between heat and work was what
attempt.
degree in temperature, can take up two different amounts of heat.
its volume be kept constant, it takes up one amount: if its pressure
  These two amounts
pressure.
421.
man, to my knowledge, prior to Dr.
of these two numbers.
421 was not, as
which had been actually consumed by the gas in expanding against
  The amount of work here performed was accurately known, the
Mayer determined the mechanical equivalent of heat.
first paper he is able to direct attention to the enormous discrepancy
their useful effect.

think it may be safely assumed that, as regards the mechanical theory
advance of all the scientific men of the time.

he calls 'Eventualitaeten,' he devoted every hour of his spare time
his first one in weight and fulness, and, indeed, marks an epoch in
  The title of Mayer's first paper was,
' The title of his second
' In
first brief paper.

heat.
100 lbs.
amount of heat as 95 lbs.

  He determines the useful effect of
 of the force of the consumed
  He records observations on the
manufactory, and calculates the equivalent of that heat in
  He compares chemical combination with mechanical
the earth.
an infinite distance would strike the earth's surface, and finds that
water 17,356' C.
  He then determines the thermal
sun.
of the sun's heat which Mayer developed with such extraordinary
  He also points to the almost
upon the earth, winding up with the profound remark, that the heat
from the sun in the form of vibratory motion; while the heat produced
earth's axial rotation.

nature, his next object is to bring his principles to bear upon the
  Wood and coal can burn;
the immeasurable reservoir of the sun.
the task of storing up the light which streams earthward from the sun,

living, take in the solar light, and by its consumption generate
  These organisms are plants.
world, indeed, constitutes the instrument whereby the wave-motion of
prepared for future use.
be shown, the existence of the human race itself is inseparably
  It is to be observed that Mayer's utterances are far from
light, or regarding coal as 'bottled sunlight.
meaning of De Saussure's observation as to the reducing power of the
of conservation.
carbonic acid, and the hydrogen and oxygen of water, are forced
sacrificed is accurately restored by the combustion of the tree.
heat and work potential in our coal strata are so much strength
  Mayer lays the axe to the root
wrote.
rays plants cannot perform the work of reduction, or generate chemical
caused by the mystic play of the vital force.
would cut off all investigation; it would land us in a chaos of

'I count,' he says, 'therefore, upon your agreement with me when I
conversion only, and never the creation of matter or force occurs.

previously done through inorganic nature, Mayer passes on to the other
  The physical forces collected by plants become the
  Animals consume vegetables, and cause them to
  Animal heat is thus produced;
  There is no
details, and reduces to figures the concomitants of muscular action.
bowler who imparts to an 8-lb.
in the act one tenth of a grain of carbon.
who lifts his own body to a height of 8 feet, consumes in the act 1
  In climbing a mountain 10,000 feet high, the
 4 drs.
  of carbon.
Boussingault had determined experimentally the addition to be made to
the addition to be made to the food of men.
equivalent of heat, which he had previously calculated, Mayer proves
oxidation.

the human body burns according to definite laws, when it performs
  He seeks to determine the particular portion of the

 in weight weigh 64 lbs; but when
 Were the oxidation
they would be utterly consumed in 80 days.
still more striking example.
the heart's action exerted upon its own tissue, it would be utterly
  And if we confine our attention to the two
muscular tissue in 3.
  Here, in his own words, emphasised in
'The muscle is only the apparatus by means of which the conversion of
production of the mechanical effect.
the lamp of life;' it is the slow-burning fluid whose chemical force,
motion.
  It was in
eminent investigators have since amply verified it.

first half of this marvellous essay.
exclusively physiological that I do not wish to meddle with it.
will only add the illustration employed by Mayer to explain the action
  As an engineer, by the motion of his
of mechanical motion almost infinite compared with its exciting cause,
activity, wholly out of proportion to the work done by the nerves

As regards these questions of weightiest import to the science of
 Mayer, in 1845, was assuredly far in advance of all

Mayer grasped the mechanical theory of heat with commanding power,
 He began,
relation between heat and work; he revealed the source of the energies
fires to solar heat.
the vegetable, up to their local exhaustion in the animal.
1845 a new thought was forced upon him by his calculations.
for the first time, drew attention to the astounding amount of heat
through.
a body falling from an infinite distance to the earth, to be
the falling body in weight, 17,356°C.
the gravitating force between the earth and sun was competent to
combustion of 6,000 times the weight of the earth of solid coal.
the quickness of genius he saw that we had here a power sufficient to
the primal molten condition of our own planet.
inadequacy of chemical forces, as we know them, to produce or maintain
  He shows that were the sun a lump of coal it
  He shows the difficulties
supposing it to possess even the high specific heat of water, its
  He finally concludes
impact of meteoric matter.
truth of this theory; that is a question which may still have to be
  But I refer to it as an illustration of the force of
all its applications.
or not, with him abides the honour of proving to demonstration that
by the collisions of cold planetary matter.

six short years, and in, the hours snatched from the duties of an
highest honour.

the differentiating influence of 'environment,' on two minds of
manner.
reflection, selecting with marvellous sagacity, from existing physical
mechanical equivalent of heat.
Joule resorted to experiment, and laid the broad and firm foundation
enjoys.
manipulation; freed from this, Mayer had time to follow the theory
  With their places
become Joule.

the developments of the Dynamical Theory accomplished since Joule and

********************
XXI.

PEOPLE in general imagine, when they think at all about the matter,
of a pin--is felt at the moment it is inflicted.
case.
of any impression made upon the nerves has to be transmitted before
  The
wound inflicted on a portion of the body distant from the brain is
  By
determined the velocity of this nervous transmission, and finds it to
velocity of sound in air.
wounded in the tail, it would not be conscious of the injury till half
 [Footnote: A most
published by Dr.
Institution' for 1866, vol.
 p.
]  But this is not the only
  There can scarcely be a doubt that to every
the brain--that every thought or feeling has its physical correlative
physical change, whether molecular or mechanical, requires time for
  So that, besides the interval of transmission, a
order--for its molecules to take up the motions or positions necessary
  Helmholtz considers that
  Thus, in the case
the transmission of the intelligence through the sensor nerves to the
arrangements necessary to consciousness, and, if the velocity of
nerves, half a second in sending a command to the tail to defend
  Thus one second and a tenth would elapse before an impression
feet long.

rapidly that within the time required by the brain to complete the
might be destroyed.
nature to cause death, this would occur without pain, Death in this
intervention of consciousness whatever.

head may be roughly estimated at a thousandth of a second.
therefore, we should have no room for sensation, and death would be
  But there are other actions which far transcend in rapidity
  A flash of lightning cleaves a cloud,
second, and the velocity of electricity is such as would carry it in a
earth and moon.
upon the retina endures for about one-sixth of a second, and that this
coal is caused to pass rapidly through the air.
an instantaneous flash continues to be seen for the sixth of a second
be in motion, it appears at rest at the place where the flash falls
  When a colour-top with differently-coloured sectors is
  Such a top,
motionless, each distinct colour being clearly seen.
has found that a flash of lightning produces the same effect.
a thunderstorm he put a colour-top in exceedingly rapid motion, and
its colours distinct.
the motion of all bodies on the earth's surface would, as Dove has
  A cannon-ball, for example, would have
space as long as the luminous impression which revealed the ball

If, then, a rifle-bullet move with sufficient rapidity to destroy life
lightning competent to produce this effect.
well-authenticated cases of people being struck senseless by lightning
  The following circumstantial

overtaken by rain, placed himself under a tree, beneath which a woman
  He looked upwards to see whether the
doing so, was struck by lightning, and fell senseless to the earth.
The woman at his side experienced the shock in her foot, but was not
  Some hours afterwards the man revived, but remembered
the branches.
from the conscious to the unconscious condition without pain.
visible marks of a lightning stroke are usually insignificant: the
instances, a red streak marks the track of the discharge over the

Under ordinary circumstances, the discharge from a small Leyden jar is
  Some time ago I happened to stand in
Leyden jars charged beside me.
touched a wire leading from the battery, and the discharge went
  Life was absolutely blotted out for a very sensible
  In a second or so consciousness
help of these external appearances, immediately concluded that I had
  The intellectual consciousness of my
consciousness.
that it had often been my desire to receive accidentally such a shock,
  But, while making this
a number of separate pieces.
from the trunk, and seemed suspended in the air.
the power of reasoning appeared to be complete long before the optic
  But what I wish chiefly to
cannot, I think, be a doubt that, to a person struck dead by
being in the least degree implicated.
sensation, unaccompanied by a pang.


  SCIENCE AND THE 'SPIRITS.

reproach against scientific men.
an attempt to apply to the 'phenomena' those methods of enquiry which

Some years ago, when the spirits were particularly active in this
friends to meet and question them.
their acquaintance, and did not wish to renew it.
privileged, and he therefore kindly arranged a transfer of the
  The spirits themselves named the time of meeting,

Absolute unbelief in the facts was by no means my condition of mind.
On the contrary, I thought it probable that some physical principle,
manifestations.
accumulation of small impulses.
motion by the well-timed puffs of his breath.
going by the ticks of another, even when the two clocks were separated
  Preconceived notions, can, moreover, vitiate, to an
  Hence
which seemed placed beyond a doubt by the known veracity of those who
  The meeting took place at a private
  My host, his intelligent
arrived.
appearance; that she was sensitive, and might resent suspicion.
was therefore requested that the tables and chairs should be examined
in the furniture.
hospitable host had arranged that the séance should be a dinner-party.
This was to me an unusual form of investigation; but I accepted it, as

The 'medium' arrived--a delicate-looking young lady, who appeared to
  I took her to dinner and sat
  Facts were absent for a considerable time, a series
  The duty of
  X.
appeared to be a chosen spiritual agent, and told us many surprising
  He affirmed that, when he took a pen in his hand, an
oracular sentences.

the thoughts of others.
thinking of, and what he intended to do during the day.
thought, is something that can be at once tested.
to X: 'If you wish to win to your cause an apostle, who will proclaim
thinking of.
 reddened, and did not tell me my thought.

now asked the young lady who sat beside me, whether she could see any
crystals, for example?  Here is the conversation which followed, as

Medium.
'
I--'Even in perfect darkness?'
Medium.
  The
 R.
 would fill this room with
'
I.
magnets?'
Medium.
'
I.
could tell whether it contained a magnet, without being informed of

--'I should know of its presence on entering the room.

--'How?'
Medium.
'
I.

--'Particularly well; I have not been so well for months.

--'Then, may I ask you whether there is, at the present moment, a

rapport with you.

her person, contained a magnet.

' The
quite as wonderful.
compared with those with which my own work had made me familiar.
therefore began to match the wonders related to me by other wonders.
lady present discoursed on spiritual atmospheres, which she could see
  I professed myself
the interior of my own eyes.
actual waves of light coming from the sun.
science could tell the exact number of waves emitted in a second, and
  The medium spoke of the performances of the
  I said that such performance was
some time previously by a scientific man.
twenty feet from a jet of gas, he could command the flame to emit a
  So
an assembly of a thousand people.
great marvels as any of those of spiritdom.
consulted, and I was pronounced to be a first-class medium.

under the table.
  I was
knocks meant 'Not yet;' and that three knocks meant 'Yes.

brisk and vigorous knocks.
particular locality, and therefore requested the spirits to be good
  They did not
by-and-by.
and placed my ear upon it, as upon a stethoscope.
disconcerted by the act; they lost their playfulness, and did not

Somewhat weary of the proceedings, I once threw myself back against my
  While thus engaged, the
  Attention was drawn to the wine, still
convincing.
the delicacy of my position.
the table, and several pairs of legs under it; but how was I, without
ward off the difficulty, I again turned a wine-glass upside down and
  The rim of the glass was not level, and my
buzzing sound.
the opposite side of the table, whom I may call A, drew attention to
  I,

pleasantry, demanded whether it was the hair that had moved the table.
The promptness of my negative probably satisfied him that my notion

The superhuman power of the spirits was next dwelt upon.
of man, it was stated, was unavailing in opposition to theirs.
human power could prevent the table from moving when they pulled it.
During the evening this pulling of the table occurred, or rather was
  Twice the table moved when my attention was
be provoked by an assumed air of inattention.
firmly between my knees, I threw myself back in the chair, and waited,
  It came.
it was pull spirit, hold muscle; the muscle, however, prevailed, and
 Up to the present moment, this interesting

A species of mental scene-painting, with which my own pursuits had
distribution of spiritual power.
provided with atmospheres, which combined with and interpenetrated
necessity of time in effecting the adjustment of the atmospheres.
rearrangement of our positions was proposed and carried out; and soon
the part of the table.
the time, and I asked permission to touch the medium's hand.
know I tremble,' was her reply.
accidentally nipped a muscle, and produced thereby an involuntary
  This vibration, I knew, must be
  I
  My attention was promptly drawn
was particularly desirous to test, expressed his belief that it was
  'I
work.
gentleman A.
shaking my chair.
  'Now, sir,' A.
exclaimed, 'they are gone.
 once more affirmed
  I could, however, notice that there were doubters
 I
that the disclosure of the secret would simply provoke anger, I kept

Again a period of conversation intervened, during which the spirits
  The evening was confessedly a dull one, but matters
  The spirits were requested to
  Our host
knock was heard.
letter 'O.
  The next letter
' I laughed, and remarked that the spirits were
  Admonished for my levity, I was informed
superinduced by a perusal of the Bible immediately before the séance.
The spelling, however, went on, and sure enough I came out a poet.
matters did not end here.
alphabet, and the next letter of the name proved to be '0.
manifestly an unfinished word; and the spirits were apparently in
  The knocks came from under the table,
 I
crept under the table.

convince himself.
could be produced under the table without its origin being revealed, I
  He did so, but in
  He adopted a tone of tender entreaty; but the 'dear spirits'
  I continued under
feeling of despair as regards the prospects of humanity never before
  Once there, the spirits resumed
'
This, then, is the result of an attempt made by a scientific man to
  It is not encouraging; and for
  The present promoters of spiritual phenomena divide
while the other is beyond the reach of proof.
believe, and they do not like to be undeceived.
powerless in the presence of this frame of mind.
state perfectly compatible with extreme intellectual subtlety and a
engendered by strong conviction, or by callous mendacity, to render
  The logical feebleness of science is not
  It keeps down the weed of superstition,
cultivation.
spiritualist will retort, 'How do you know that a uniform experience
thousand years: that is no proof that it will rise tomorrow; within
'  Taking
in the face of all the science in the world.
science has given us all the knowledge of the universe which we now
  The
  It is in vain that
  He has but
swept, and garnished.


more than once among the spirits, at their own invitation.
not improve on acquaintance.
dominance over the weak mind of man.



LONDON: PRINTED BY
SPOTTISWOODE AND Co, NEW-STREET SQUARE
AND PARLIAMENT STREET

**********************************************************************

FRAGMENTS OF SCIENCE:
A SERIES OF DETACHED ESSAYS, ADDRESSES, AND REVIEWS.


R.

LONDON: PRINTED BY
SPOTTISWOODE AND CO, NEW-STREET SQUARE
AND PARLIAMENT STREET
SIXTH EDITION.

 II.



1879.


********************
In the bright sky they perceived an illuminator;
in the roar of thunder and in the violence of
and out of the rain they created an Indra, or giver of rain.



I.

1861.

roused emotions hostile to calm investigation, it must for ages have
thought of law dawned upon the unfolding human mind these otherwise
  In the fall of
thunder-peal was to him the hammer-clang of an exasperated god.
Propitiation of these terrible powers was the consequence, and

But observation tends to chasten the emotions and to check those

proximate causes; the idea of direct personal volition mixing itself
  Many of us fear
  Our religious feelings are dear to us, and we look with
which is to dry them up.
to our present enlightenment has excited, in a greater or less degree,
  But the fact is, that we have not yet determined
religious feeling.
transitory, and confound the living plant with the decaying pole to
  My object, however, at present is not to argue, but
  We have ceased to propitiate the powers of
natural laws.
conceded that the age of miracles is past.

of 1858, an athletic young priest, who, after a solid breakfast,
the mountains.
  Year by year
meteorological arrangements as should ensure food and shelter for the
  A diversion of the Rhone, or a
been of incalculable benefit to the inhabitants of the valley.
the priest would have shrunk from the idea of asking the Omnipotent to
over the Grimsel pass, and down the valley of Oberhasli to Brientz.
This he would have deemed a miracle, and he did not come to ask the
thought lay quite within the bounds of the natural and non-miraculous.
A Protestant gentleman who was present at the time smiled at this
  He had no faith in the priest's blessing; still, he deemed
or to cause the water to flow up-hill.

smile at the honest Tyrolese priest, who, when he feared the bursting
means of averting the calamity.
convert the ice into adamant, or to strengthen its texture, so as to
that his sacrifice would cause the stream to roll back upon its source
  But beyond the
knew not how.
he firmly believed that in yonder cloud-land matters could be so
threatened him and his people should be caused to shrink within its

Both these priests fashioned that which they did not understand to
  In their case imagination came
  A similar state of
  Many of these, among whom
ago with the question of perpetual motion.
a machine which should execute work without the expenditure of power;
  The faith in
the inventor, was extremely exciting, and every attempt to destroy
it.
the true functions of machinery, the dream dissolved.
getting work out of mere mechanical combinations disappeared: but
which filled the imagination of the Tyrolese priest, and out of which
  There was the mystic store
electricity and magnetism, all competent to produce mechanical motion.
[Footnote: See Helmholtz: 'Wechselwirkung der Naturkräfte.
then, was the mine in which our gem must be sought.
more refined form of the ancient faith revived; and, for aught I know,
on the problem which like-minded men in former ages left unsolved.

impossible?  The answer to this question is the statement of that
of the Conservation of Energy.
can make its appearance in nature without an equivalent expenditure of
to be mutually convertible, but that no new agency is created.
runs into heat; heat into electricity; electricity into magnetism;
and heat.
changes in nature, supposing no miracle to supervene, are the
  A
creation of energy, whereas the principle of Conservation is--no

It is an old remark that the law which moulds a tear also rounds a
  In the application of law in nature the terms great and small
  Thus the principle referred to teaches us that the
ruled as the earth in its orbital revolution round the sun; and that
necessity as the return of the seasons.
the slightest mist by the special volition of the Eternal, would be as
precipices, down the valley of Hash to Meyringen and Brientz.

demonstrate that the Tyrolese priest, or his colleague of the Rhone
Science can demonstrate the incompleteness of the knowledge of nature
the number of instances in which we 'ask amiss,' by showing that we
it.
natural law, quite as serious as the stoppage of an eclipse, or the
individual or national, could call one shower from heaven, or deflect

Those, therefore, who believe that the miraculous is still active in
for fair weather and for rain: while those who hold that the age of
petitions.
justification, may fairly urge that the latest conclusions of science
which manifestly was that the distribution of natural phenomena is not
  'He maketh His sun to rise on
unjust.
by Professor Mansel in his admirable defence of the belief in
in external nature, it necessarily follows that natural laws are more
the assumed permanence of those laws would be worthy of confidence.

men wise enough to understand all this, and courageous enough to act
  Such men do service to public character, by
disease and scarcity, instead of a delusive reliance on supernatural
  But they have also a value beyond this local and temporary one.
They prepare the public mind for changes, which though inevitable,

envelope, and the more unyielding the metal is, the worse for its
  There are in the world men who would encompass philosophic
reality giving it explosive force.
stamp to which I have alluded, scope is gradually given to thought for
accordance with the necessities of the time.


remoter origin of the next following one, was this.
day of prayer and humiliation, on account of a bad harvest, was
of the Church of England, doubting the wisdom of the demonstration,
  For this act of

to lend them a helping hand in their struggle against odds, I inserted
1861.
weight and distinction in the scientific world, and, I believe, of
to an exceedingly thoughtful article on Prayer and Cholera in the
' My eminent correspondent deemed the article a
  I, also, was struck by
arguments satisfactory, and in a short note to the editor of the 'Pall
  This letter elicited some
the subject.
letter, and soon afterwards, by an extremely courteous note from the

Though thus stopped locally, the discussion flowed in other
  Sermons were preached, essays were published, articles
some of the religious newspapers.
notice that the discussion, save in a few cases where natural
vituperation.
demonstrate earnestness, while gentlemanly feeling was too predominant
itself in abuse.
caused another excellent friend of mine to recommend to my perusal the
review.

 Mozley's book belongs to that class of writing of which Butler may
  It is strong, genuine argument about difficult
not with what appears the gist and strong point of a question, but
  It is a book the
.
 But we think it is a
which befits it, and with a perception of its real elements.
book which will have attractions for those who like to see a powerful
or reserve or show of any kind, as a wrestler closes body to body with
argument.

We should add, that the faults of the work are wholly on the surface
that of any book within recent memory, and that it abounds in striking

over.

********************
II  MIRACLES AND SPECIAL PROVIDENCES.

 i.
 645.


IT is my privilege to enjoy the friendship of a select number of
expressing without disguise the notions and opinions I entertain
opinions subjected to criticism.
and loving men, patient in hearing, tolerant in reply, who know how to
  From
strongly to my attention the volume of 'Bampton Lectures' for 1865, in
 Mozley.
receiving this note, I had in part made the acquaintance of the work
' The
companion of my summer tour in the Alps.
snowy days which were only too prevalent in 1866, and during the days
thoroughly conversant with Mr.
  I found it clear and
the keen air of the mountains was to my body.
jotted down thoughts regarding it, intending afterwards to work them
  Other duties, however, interfered with the
I now publish, not hoping to be able, within any reasonable time, to

Mr.
miracles which of late years has taken place, and which determined his
  He acquits modern science of having had any
  The objection against
laws of nature, but simply because they are opposed to that plain and
  The present movement
penetration of the present age.
without question, because without reflection; but the exercise of the
  Men are
facts; and when a miracle rises to view, they halt before the
it were now passing before their eyes, they ask themselves, 'Can this
question has led to a disbelief in miracles, in others to a
  The aim of Mr.
that the strengthening of belief is the logical result which ought to

Attempts have been made by religious men to bring the Scripture
attempts are rejected by Mr.
mark.
their evidential value in his eyes depends entirely upon their
  Thus deviating, they suggest and
commend the person in whom this power is vested as a messenger from on
  Without these credentials such a messenger would have no right
mission backed by a holy life.
order of nature is, or may be, disturbed.
also the arena of 'special providences.

  One form of the
another in the rainbow; but, while the line which divides the
their distinction broadly expressed is this: that, while a special
nature of a miracle to give proof, as distinguished from surmise, of
'
Mr.
special providences, as distinguished from miracles.
Arius,' he says, 'was not miraculous, because the coincidence of the
to the orthodox faith .
.
of extraordinary Divine agency; but it was a special providence,
  The miracle of the
the same reason, because the coincidence of an instantaneous fall of
preternatural agency.

certain narratives published in Methodist magazines, which I used to
  The general title of these exciting
and in them the most extraordinary escapes from peril were recounted
were adduced as illustrations of Divine retribution.
magazines, or elsewhere, I found recorded the case of the celebrated
providences approaching in conclusiveness to miracles, is worthy of
  It is related of this holy man that, on one occasion,
  Grain was present,

the sails turned, the corn was ground, after which the wind ceased.
According to the canon of the Bampton Lecturer, this, though carrying
by a hair's-breadth the quality of a miracle.
arisen, and _might_ have ceased, in the ordinary course of nature.
the occurrence did not 'compel the inference of extraordinary Divine
'  In like manner Mr.
the cross to Constantine was a miracle, or a special providence,
  As only a meteoric
agency, but not full evidence.

more among the pious Tyrolese, the mountains are dotted with shrines,
mercies--legs, feet, arms, and hands--of gold, silver, brass, and
express its indebtedness.
Virgin Mary.
through the instrumentality of the Mother of God.
 Mozley's
peasant, are substantially the same.
nature, instead of flowing ever onward in the uninterrupted rhythm of
  As
expressed in prayer, are confessedly powerless; but prayer is the
will be free, man, of course, commands nature.

benefits derived from it, it could not, in my opinion, last a decade.
As a purely objective fact, we should soon see that the distribution
men; that the law of gravitation crushes the simple worshippers of
 Mary, while singing their hymns, just as surely as if they
  The hold of this belief upon the
warmth, force, and elevation with which it is commonly associated.
is plain, however, that these feelings may exist under the most
  They are not limited to Church of England
  Though less
Methodist and the Tyrolese peasant than in the heart of Mr.

  A
  They find vent in the battle-cry of the
  They take hue and form in the hunting-grounds of the Red
wave of victory, above the terrors of the grave.

providence, is that the former furnishes _proof_, while in the case of
  Dissolve the element of doubt, and
the other.
be a special providence, it would cease to be a special providence and
  There is not the least cloudiness about Mr.
Mozley's meaning here.

 Mozley conveys no
characteristic of the thing intended to be expressed.
apparent unwillingness on the part of the lecturer to call a special
  Instead of
miracle.
the chain of causation being so high up as to be wholly, or in part,
uncertainty whether there is any contact at all, either high or low.
By the use of an incorrect term, however, a grave danger is avoided.
For the idea of doubt, if kept systematically before the mind, would
edification.
encourages the trust which is necessary to supplement the evidence.

 Mozley in favour of
regard to miracles.
incommensurate with the fact which it has to establish, or rather
establish it, Mr.
'  They must urge the
  The
of real religion, which is an affair of the heart; but they are not, I
credibility of physical facts.
of the intellect alone, appeals to the affections being reserved for

is deemed desirable that the affections are called upon to back it.
undesirable, they would, with equal right, be called upon to act the
  Even to the disciplined scientific mind this would be a
  A favourite theory--the desire to establish or
powers of estimating facts.
a fascination of this kind, unable to extricate themselves from its
  They had certain data, but not, as it happened,
  By a process exactly analogous to that invoked by Mr.
they supplemented the data, and went wrong.
intellects were so blinded to the perception of adverse phenomena that
  If, then, to the disciplined scientific
danger, what must it be to the indiscriminate audience which.

Frankenstein.
abroad, in the degrading spiritualistic phenomena of the present day.
Again, I say, where the aim is to elevate the mind, to quicken the
affections by all means be invoked; but they must not be permitted to
occurrences in external nature.
worthless when wrapped in this atmosphere of the affections; the most
the most astounding objective error.

are often our best guides, the estimation of moral goodness being one
  But at this precise point, where they are really of use,
 Mozley excludes the affections and demands a miracle as a
  He will not accept any other evidence of
 'No outward life and conduct,' he
because goodness depends upon the inward motive, and the perfection of
' But surely the
imposes a greater strain upon logic than that involved in our
  There is, at least, moral
is no such congruity between the miracle and the life within.
test of moral goodness laid down by Mr.
John, who says, 'He that doeth righteousness is righteous; 'nor is it
grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?'  But it is the test of
made bread.
of Mr.
  The Jesus of John,' says this noble and mighty
live, and may be blessed, and out of whom there is only Death and
  And,' continues Fichte, 'he appeals, and rightly
practical sense of truth in man, not even knowing any other proof than
Me, he shall know of the doe-trine whether it be of God.

 Mozley's test, with which alone I am now dealing, it is
the miraculous comes into play.
himself to the conversion of water into wine, He would have fallen
thing to convert one liquid into another than to convert a dead rod
  But Jannes and Jambres, we are informed, were
  Hence, if Mr.
exist, on the one side of which miraculous power demonstrates
  How is this 'point of
magicians and Moses, for within this space the power passed from the
  But how to mark the point of passage--how,
of power, we are to infer a total inversion of quality--it is
  Moses, we are informed, produced a large
  I do not possess
data, either the goodness of the one or the badness of the other; and
at a loss.
it is a demonstration of goodness in all cases or in none.

works as no other man did, he ought, logically speaking, to accept the
a proportionate goodness on their part.
class who are consigned to ever-lasting fire prepared for the devil
  Such zeal as that of Mr.
fear, to eat his religion up.
spiritual.
goodness of Christ.
custom required no miracle to produce obedience.
of the supernatural that Jesus caused those sent to seize Him to go
  It was the sublime and holy
reverence even of his foes.


of Mahomet; and he derides the latter as 'irrational' because it does

thriven in the world, and at one time it held sway over larger
  The spread and influence of
 Mozley as 'a
miracles; and he makes use of this result to strengthen his plea for
  His logical warrant for this proceeding is not clear.
It is the method of science, when a phenomenon presents itself,
exclude them one by one, so as to arrive at length at the truly
  Heat, for example, is associated with a phenomenon;
cause.
magnetism, but the phenomenon remains: hence, magnetism is not its
  Thus, also, when we seek the cause of a diffusion of a
its founders--we exclude the miracles, and, finding the result
  This
  It has lived and
Christianity has spread _because_ of miracles, is, I submit, opposed

The incongruity of inferring moral goodness from miraculous power has
Mr.
  In
draw from the miracles of Christ any certain conclusion as to His
  He dwells very forcibly on what he calls 'the
delight.
Pleasure of again and again knocking the breath out of it.
he urges, can only deal with the past; and the moment we attempt to
moment reached, we are condemned by reason.
when he infers from Christ's miracles a Divine and altogether
 Mozley places himself precisely under this
  For what is his logical ground for concluding that the
be the result of expanded human power?  A miracle he defines as
  But how does he know that the miracles
absolutely no reason to adduce save this--that man has never hitherto
  But does the fact that man _has_ never raised
must be Mr.
beyond the limit it has now reached--which I pronounce unlawful.
a period may come when man will be able to raise the dead.
conceded--and I do not see how Mr.
destroys the necessity of inferring Christ's Divinity from His
  He, it may be contended, antedated the humanity of the
by-and-by becomes the general level of the ocean.
you will, no other warrant will be found for the all-important
argument which has been stigmatised by Mr.
sand'--the argument from experience.

seen with his own eyes every miracle recorded in the New Testament.
But he has, not seen these miracles; and his intellectual plight is
  He accepts these miracles on testimony.
believe that testimony?  How does he know that it is not delusion; how
writing bears the marks of sobriety and truth; and that in many cases

not solely derived from the fact that men, _as we know them_, do not
untrue?  Does not the entire value of the testimony of the Apostles
then, that those said to have seen the miracles, based their
that Mr.
argument.
insertion of a principle of belief, to which he flatly denies
  His reasoning, in fact, cuts two ways--if it destroys
the basis on which Mr.

*****
Over this argument from experience, which at bottom is _his_ argument,
 Mozley rides rough-shod.
with which he tramples on it.
too much of it, and thus invited his powerful assault.
difficulty of belief in miracles to rise from their being in
grounds of our belief in that order.
equalled, and with a confidence in its conclusions never surpassed, he
without due examination, had come to the conclusion that the order of
  What we mean, he says, by our belief in the order
 There
 Mozley, the slightest rational basis for this

That any cause in nature is more permanent than its existing and known
instances besides what it has produced already, we have no evidence.
Let us imagine,' he continues, 'the occurrence of a particular
  Upon that single occurrence
  If it
occurrence, a cessation would occur as the most natural event to us.
But let it continue one hundred times, and we should find no
occurred every day for years, its occurrence would be a certainty to
.
 What ground of reason can we assign for
moment what it has been up to this moment, i.
 for our belief in the
  No demonstrative reason can be given,
contradiction.
reasoning respecting the course of nature is founded _upon_ this

  It is without a reason.
rests upon no rational grounds, and can be traced to no rational
'
*****
'Everything,' Mr.
every provision we make for the future, every safeguard and caution we
supposes this belief; and yet this belief has no more producible
  It is necessary,
possesses no intellectual character.

.
 The proper function,' continues Mr.
principle, the argument from experience, the belief in the order of
operate as a practical basis for the affairs of life and the carrying
' To sum up, the belief in the order of nature is
rational account.
induce us to till our fields, to raise our winter fuel, and thus to
be like the past.

 Mozley, with the emphasis of a man who
connection of the order of nature with the ground of reason,
miracles.
the ground is gone upon which it could be maintained that miracles, as
' When we regard
receives a more imposing name, and is called the inductive principle,'
  'The inductive principle is only this
.

this fact into a law, a totally unscientific principle comes into
nature.

word the _results_ of scientific investigation, as proving anything
been achieved.
fruits shall ye know them.
to give one or two examples of the mode in which men of science apply
 Mozley credits them, and
they climb from the region of facts to that of laws.

the effect being then explained by the maxim that 'Nature abhors a
' It was not known that there was any limit to the height to
Florence, while attempting to raise water to a very great elevation,
  Beyond
  The
which had not treated his science over kindly, is said to have twitted
a vacuum only to a height of thirty-two feet.
not solve the problem.
whom, after due pondering, the thought occurred, that the water might
liquid outside.
pressure to be found?  After much reflection, it flashed upon
that the impalpable air might possess weight, and that a column of
hold the pressure of the atmosphere in equilibrium.

impossible to analyse.
from the wise and sedulous contemplation of facts to the principles on
  The mind is, as it were, a photographic plate,
when so cleansed, and not before, receives impressions from the light
  This passage from 'facts to principles is called induction;
of inspiration.
to be in accordance with outward fact.
induction, we must resort to deduction and experiment.

holds the pressure of the atmosphere in equilibrium, a shorter column
  Now, mercury is thirteen
atmosphere ought to be able to sustain only thirty inches of mercury.
Here, then, is a deduction which can be immediately submitted to
 Torricelli took a glass tube a yard or so in length,
he stopped the open end with his thumb, and inverted it into a basin
  One can imagine the feeling with which
finding that his thought had forestalled a fact never before revealed
  The column sank, but it ceased to sink at a height of
  From that

The celebrated Pascal followed Torricelli with another deduction.
reasoned thus: If the mercurial column be supported by the atmosphere,
for the less will be the weight of the air overhead.
friend to ascend the Puy de Dôme, carrying with him a barometric
that during the subsequent descent the column rose.

experiments have been made upon this subject.
an apparatus for such experiments.
moreover, pumps have refused to work; but on examination it has
priming, or that some other defect in the apparatus accounted for the
  In every case of the kind the skill of the
  In no case has the
of pump-water, has been hitherto the demonstrated rule of nature.
also as regards Pascal's experiment.
universal experience ever since.
up in balloons; but no deviation from Pascal's result has ever been
  Barometers, like pumps, have refused to act; but instead of
interference on the part of its Author with atmospheric pressure,
instruments themselves.
verifying fact that Mr.
'
Let us now briefly consider the case of Newton.
had occupied themselves with the problem of the solar system.
had deduced, from a vast mass of observations, those general
' It had been
inspiration which reveal to the human mind the vast in the minute, the
which bodies fall to the earth might also be an attraction.
pondered all these things.
darkness until it became entirely luminous.
cannot explain; but, as a matter of fact, it does arise.
remark here, that this kind of pondering is a process with which the
  They, for the
observation, and subsequent brooding over facts.
when those whose education has been derived from the ancients speak of
reason one of its most important factors.

him while he 'intended his mind,' rising like a series of
  He made this idea of attraction his
  But, to apply the idea to the solar system, it was necessary to
with the distance.
action of the earth as a whole, to that of its constituent particles.
And persistent thought brought more and more clearly out the final
particle with a force varying inversely as the square of the distance

Here we have the flower and outcome of Newton's induction; and how to
  The first step
that if this law of attraction be the true one; if the earth be
sphere equal to the earth in size on a body outside of it, is the same
contracted to a point at its centre.
centre of the earth is the point from which distances must be measured

From experiments executed before his time, Newton knew the amount of
4,000 miles from its centre.
attraction at a greater distance, and thus to determine the law of its
  But how was he to find a body at a sufficient distance?
which he could attain would be too small to enable him to solve his
  What did he do?  He fixed his thoughts upon the moon;--a
earth's centre.
to be 1/3600th of what it would be at the earth's surface.
exactly what his theory required.
pause of Newton after his first calculations, or speak of his
the observations then at his command.
is the normal action of the scientific mind.
scientific men were not accustomed to demand verification--if they
their science, instead of being, as it is, a fortress of adamant,
theologic storms to which it is periodically exposed.

illuminated them with persistent thought, and finally divined the
  But, having thus travelled
outwards, and justified it by demonstrating its fitness to external

And here, in passing, I would notice a point which is well worthy of
  Kepler had deduced his laws from observation.
as those observations extended, the planetary motions had obeyed these
continuing to obey them.
believed that those laws would continue to illustrate themselves in
  But this was not sufficient.
find no repose in the mere registration of sequence in nature.
further question intrudes itself with resistless might, Whence comes
in nature?  The truly scientific intellect never can attain rest until
 It
pre-eminently with the scientific man of to-day.
most ignorant, he shares the belief that spring will succeed winter,
that winter will succeed autumn.
knowledge is essential to his intellectual repose--that this
_necessary_; that the gravitating force exerted between the sun and a
produce the observed succession of the seasons.
relation between forces and phenomena has been established, is the law
this is effected does the mind of the scientific philosopher rest in

The expectation of likeness, then, in the procession of phenomena, is
of nature.
whether they resemble or do not resemble anything that has gone
  Hence, in judging of the order of nature, our enquiries
  From Galileo to Newton,
heavens, and clear heads have been pondering the phenomena of the
  The same eyes and minds have been also observing,
of the earth.
the law has for a moment been suspended; nothing has ever intimated
things at any time existed which could not be rigorously deduced from

Given the distribution of matter, and the forces in operation, in the
what is now occurring in our own.
and find our calculations true to the second.
of those that have occurred in the early times of history, and find
  Anomalies and perturbations in
of demonstrating any inconstancy on the part of natural law, have
  Instead of
of the Author of nature with the law of gravitation, the question
this law, can the perturbation be produced?' Guided by a principle, he
were placed, the observed perturbations would follow.
result.
region which the intellect of the theoretic astronomer had already
Place.
which 'rests upon no rational grounds, and can be traced to no
which 'philosophy' has uprooted from 'the ground of reason,' and fixed


The proper function of the inductive principle, or the belief in the
 Mozley, is 'to act as a practical basis for
' But what,
the whiteness about the poles of Mars, to do with the affairs of
atmosphere contains sodium, or that the nebula of Orion contains
exercise of the inductive principle, which, reiterates Mr.
'purely practical,' have been expended upon subjects as unpractical as
  What practical interest has society in the fact that the spots
watched for half a century, it is found to perform small motions which
And yet, I doubt not, Sir Edward Sabine would deem a life of
close, these infinitesimal motions.
founded in man's desire to know--a desire arising from his position
material universe is the complement of the intellect; and, without the
forms of self-consciousness at all.
which the Ego is endowed with self-discernment.
exercise of reason to explore the meaning of a universe to which we
proper commentary on the methods we have pursued.

through nature, putting in the place of law the figments of
  For thousands of years witchcraft, and magic,
 Mozley's 'distinctive
  They made worse than
might have made something of it.
lifetime of this era of 'unintelligent impulse,' the progress in
preceded ours.

all the strength of Mr.
  They
for us--cleared the ground of the belief in the order of nature, and
evidence' to decide.
had free scope, and we know the result.
natural knowledge which we now possess, keen jurists and cultivated
blood run cold.
versed in all the arts of cross-examination, these men, nevertheless,
humanity.
witness-box, and question her--of her voiceless 'testimony' they knew
  In all cases between man and man, their judgment was to be
leaders of the blind.
Suffolk, under a sentence of Sir Matthew Hale, who took the
unquestionable; "for first, the Scriptures had affirmed so much; and
persons, which is an argument of their confidence of such a crime.
Sir Thomas Browne, who was a great physician as well as a great
opinion that the persons were bewitched.
Rationalism, vol.
 p.
]
Mr.
only accepted by the ignorant and superstitious, 'because it is easy
'  But he does consider it 'a
  In what
whose education was unable to save them from the frightful errors

absolutely defenceless against delusions which could set even that
  Like nine-tenths of our clergy at the present
but as regards a knowledge of nature, which is here the one thing
  In the case of
negative, before we assign a value to the positive; to comprehend the
evidence of men.
even intellectual men and women are capable of, as to judging
latitude fifty-two degrees north.
imagine, to influence our opinion regarding the testimony of people
particle of that restraint which the discoveries of physical science

*****
Having thus submitted Mr.
challenged at the hands of a student of nature, I am unwilling to quit
respect for his character.
recent death affected me as that of a friend.
style of his book, I heartily subscribe to the description with which
  It is marked
without a single word from first to last of asperity or insinuation
the importance of the issue, but from a deliberate and resolutely
of the duty, on themes like these, of a more than judicial calmness.

at page 17, Mr.
the seventh volume of the 'Contemporary Review.
  T.


AMONG the scraps of manuscript, written at the time when Mr.
work occupied my attention, I find the following reflections:
With regard to the influence of modern science which Mr.
so low, one obvious effect of it is to enhance the magnitude of many
difficulties of belief.
of the universe.
 Mr.
inadequate notions the Jews entertained regarding the 'firmament of
who was persecuted for hazarding the assertion, then deemed monstrous,
  The
more commensurate with man and his concerns than those of the universe
purposes, or that in compliance with his prayers, changes should occur
world than it can be now.
natural phenomena, science has augmented the distance between them and

As a natural consequence the demand for evidence is more exacting than
been disturbed.
the victory of Joshua over the Amorites was rendered complete.
this case the sun is reported to have stood still for 'about a whole
  An Englishman
greater amount of evidence to prove that this occurrence took place,
Joshua.
stoppage of a fiery ball less than a yard in diameter, while to the
times the earth in size.
Joshua dealt with what was apparent merely, but that what really
to exercise a greater reserve in accepting the miracle, and to demand
satisfied an ancient Israelite, will still be conceded to a man of

There is a scientific as well as an historic imagination; and when, by
clearly realised, the event assumes proportions so vast, in comparison
reflection.
trillions of horses working for the whole of the time employed by
  The amount of power thus
thousand times the strength of that of Joshua, with a thousand times
necessary to the extinction of a handful of Amorites, but for millions
  All this wonder is silently passed over by the sacred
  Whether,
practical means of vengeance, the same lavish squandering of energy
  If evidential, the energy was wasted, because
the ratio of the quantity lost to the quantity employed, may be

To other miracles similar remarks apply.
from this little sand-grain of an earth to the immeasurable heavens,
the very suns which warm them being barely visible across abysmal
innumerable may burn, whose light can never stir the optic nerve at
Builder and Sustainer of it all showing Himself in a burning bush,
ascribed to Him in the Jewish Scriptures, the incongruity must appear.
Did this credulous prattle of the ancients about miracles stand alone;
examples of moral grandeur unmatched elsewhere in the history of the
since ceased to be the transmitted inheritance of intelligent men.
Influenced by the thoughts which this universe inspires, well may we
the heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon, and the stars, which
or the son of man that thou shouldst so regard him?'
If you ask me who is to limit the outgoings of Almighty power, my
  If you should urge that if the Builder and Maker of
form of a burning bush, there is nothing to prevent Him from doing so,
  I neither agree with you nor
  But I
enquiries relate, not to that power as it is actually displayed in the
  Your question is,
likely that the Omnipotent should do so and so?  but, is my
so?  I am not prepared to deny your competence.
belongs the faculty of enlarging and diminishing, of distorting and
  It can
mountain, and a mountain as high as the stars.
congruities and unite incongruities.
we can drop one half of each, and unite in idea the other two halves
  We see a horse and we see a man; we are able to drop
  Thus
of cherubs and seraphs, the hoofs, horns, and tail of the Evil One,
elaborated from materials furnished to the imagination by the senses.
It behoves you and me to take care that our notions of the Power which
human power.
denied.
picture to yourself a Being able and willing to do any and every
  You are right in saying that in opposition to this
' The man of
its application, thinking it is not science which is here the thing of
solidity of science is opposed.



********************
        Prayer as a means to effect a private end is theft and
--EMERSON.


III  ON PRAYER AS A FORM OF PHYSICAL ENERGY.

space for some remarks upon a subject, which, though my relation to it
a considerable amount of animadversion.

illustrative of the history of the human mind, in relation to this and
  In the fourth century the belief in Antipodes was
  The pious Lactantius was as angry
and quite as unsparing in his denunciations of their 'Monstrosities.
Lactantius was irritated because, in his mind, by education and habit,
simultaneously disturbed.
century the notion that the earth was fixed, and that the sun and
the separation then attempted by Galileo rousing the animosity and
  Men still living can remember
the age of the earth, the association between chronology and religion
  In our day, however, the
Universe and its Author are not impaired, but improved, by the
 Look, finally, at
and compare it with the calm attendant on the appearance of the far
'Descent of Man.

considered essential to it.
the fixity of the earth is given up; the period of Creation and the
upon without terror; and other changes have occurred in the same
  In fact, from the
of purification, freeing itself slowly and painfully from the physical
aspirations of the soul.
purification is needed, while others oppose this notion with the
  The bone of contention at
  It is not my wish to excite
phrase.
honestly in the face, and then to say whether, in the estimation of
at all events upon special occasions, invoke a Power which checks and
winds, which affects the growth of corn and the health of men and
circumstances, produces the precise effects caused by physical energy
  To any person who deals sincerely
subtleties, this, I think, will appear a true statement of the case.

represent him, has any wish to meddle with prayer.
attention as a form of physical energy, or as the equivalent of such
examination from which all our present knowledge of the physical
  And if his researches lead him to a conclusion
philosophy implied in the words, 'He maketh His sun to shine on the
unjust'--he contends only for the displacement of prayer, not for its
  He simply says, physical nature is not its legitimate

This conclusion, moreover, must be based on pure physical evidence,
  The
changes phenomena in compliance with the prayers of men, is, in my
  It may of course be rendered
such conceptions form no necessary part of the theory.
of experience that an earthly father, who is at the same time both
do not ask amiss, takes pleasure in granting their requests.
also that this compliance extends to the alteration, within certain
  With this suggestion
place behind natural phenomena a Universal Father, who, in answer to

  The conception of an
by the ordinary phenomena of wave-motion in water and in air; and in
by the ordinary action of man upon earth.
_impossibilities_, though I am constantly charged with doing so.
not even urge inconsistency, but, on the contrary, frankly admit that
of phenomena as I have to place mine.

the intellect, and I am sorry to find us parting company at this
  The region of theory, both in science and theology, lies
in the sensible world.
the deductions from it with the facts of observation.
deductions be in accordance with the facts, we accept the theory: if
  A single experiment is
  Of this
as a crucial test of the Emission Theory.
travelled faster in water than in air; according to the Undulatory
  An experiment
conclusive against Newton's theory.

impossible to devise a mode of verification of their theories which
  Is it that, while the
between theory and fact, the highest pleasure of the religious man has
any further effort in this direction being a mere disturbance of his
the middle ages, so admirably described by Whewell--that 'practice of
general rules capable of direct verification, but to notions vague,
when we connect natural events with moral and historic causes.
'Thus,' he continues, 'the character of mysticism is that it refers
such as are heterogeneous and remote; to which we must add, that the
accompanied with a glow of enthusiastic feeling.

shown themselves of late; most conspicuously, I regret to say, in the
many grounds, entitled to the respect of thoughtful men.
correspondence, however, published by the same journal, are to be
flightiness of the journal itself.

feeling which prompts prayer.
see guided, not extinguished--devoted to practicable objects instead
  In some form or other, not yet evident, it may,
  Certain it is
of being--natural foolishness, bigotry, and intolerance being in their
God--I regard others who employ it, as forming part of the very cream
  The faith that adds to the folly and ferocity of the
self-sacrifice by the other.
nature upon which it falls.
prayer, in its purer forms, hints at disciplines which few of us can
  But no good can come of giving it a
  It may
promote physical well-being, as the digging of Aesop's orchard brought
  Such
affirm that it is such issues that are always in view.
present, I must end.
make such free use of the terms insolence, outrage, profanity, and
  They obviously lack the sobriety of mind necessary to give
serious refutation.



********************
IV.

THE origin, growth, and energies of living things are subjects which
  To account for
from the limitations observed among the powers of inorganic nature.
This agent was called _vital force_; and, under its influence, plants
determinate forms.
vital processes have undergone profound modifications; and the
evidenced by the discussions and protests which are now common,
  In tracing these phenomena
present day declare that they ultimately arrive at a single source of
circumstance is that this source is not the direct fiat of a
creed of Zoroaster, must be regarded as inorganic force.
is considered as proved that all the energy which we derive from

A few years ago, when the sun was affirmed to be the source of life,
assertion has latterly assumed would have assented, in a general way,
  Their assent, however, was more poetic than
mechanical signification attached to their words.
the peculiarity of modern conclusions: that there is no creative
power which we obtain from the muscles of man and animals, as much as
produced at the sun's expense.
may have our fires; he is also so much the colder that we may have our
  It is, for example, certain that
expressed in numbers, in order to furnish the power which lifted this
summit of Mont Blanc.

as a thing totally distinct from ordinary mechanical energy.
of them can nevertheless be derived from the other.
raised by friction to the temperature of ignition; while by properly


of the sun.
referred to the fall of meteoric matter upon his surface; and whether
might be thus supported.
condition of our planet was, as supposed by eminent men, due to the
molten condition might be thus brought about.

matter, and if from the light and heat thus produced we can derive the
follows that vital energy may have a proximately mechanical origin.

energy derivable from plants and animals?  Let us try to give an
  Water may be raised from the
  In
cascades, to spurt in fountains, to boil in eddies, or to flow
  It may, moreover, be caused to set
saws and hammers, and drive piles.
indicated would be derived from the original power expended in raising
  There is no energy
descending is merely the parcelling out and distribution of the work
  In precisely this sense is all the energy of
originally exerted by the sun.
of the power consists in the forcible separation of a quantity of the
higher position, the power thus expended being returned by the water
  In the case of vital phenomena, the source of power
substances by the sun.
earthward 'gravity,' and that which draws atoms together 'chemical
qualitative identity of the two forces.
and, to the intellect, the falling of carbon atoms against oxygen
the earth.

through the reduction of chemical compounds.
life are more or less complicated reversals of these processes of
  We eat the vegetable, and we breathe the oxygen of the
carbon and hydrogen by the action of the sun, again falls towards
  Through the
is produced while a weight rises, the animal is produced while a
  But the question is not exhausted here.
employed in our first illustration generates all the motion displayed
the machinery interposed in the path of the water.
the primary action of the sun's rays is qualified by the atoms and
  Molecular forces
  In the
as to result in one case in the formation of a cabbage, and in another
  So also, as regards the reunion of
combining energy acts may, in one case, weave the texture of a frog,

The matter of the animal body is that of inorganic nature.
no substance in the animal tissues which is not primarily derived from
  Are the forces of organic matter,
philosophy of the present day negatives the question.
compounding, in the organic world, of forces belonging equally to the

matter.
us from the inorganic to the organic; and such a reversal is at least
  The tendency, indeed, of modern science is to break down
both to the operation of forces which are the same in kind, but which

Consider the question of personal identity, in relation to that of
  Thirty-four years ago, Mayer of Heilbronn, with that
pointed out that the blood was 6 the oil of the lamp of life,' the
  The muscles are the
play.
  But the whole body, though more
years it is entirely renewed.
maintained across this flight of molecules?  To man, as we know him,
be all changed, while consciousness exhibits no solution of
  Like changing sentinels, the oxygen, hydrogen, and carbon
arrive, and thus, while the Non-ego shifts, the Ego remains the same.
Constancy of form in the grouping of the molecules, and not constancy
perception.
existence is composed of the same particles.

others, and thus renewing a pre-existing form, to be gathered first
those which they occupy in the body.
selfsame forces and distribution of forces, the selfsame motions and
stand before us as a sentient thinking being?  There seems no valid
  Or, supposing a planet carved
at a distance from him equal to that of our earth, would one of the
I lean to the affirmative.
mass, whether or not those forces reach to the extent of forming a
  In an amorphous drop of water lie latent all the
play of molecules in a cooling planet?  If these statements startle,
theologians, who were equally unaware that it is, at bottom,

Questions such as these derive their present interest in great part
  And
questions the better for the cause of truth.
physical science is polar.
know, everything.
  Science
nature, of which it is the product; but science knows nothing of the
  Who or what made the sun, and gave his
ultimate particles of matter their wondrous power of varied
remains unaltered.
in heaven and earth than are dreamt of in the present philosophy of
is the attempt to grapple with the Inscrutable, the ultimate frame of

    Or belief in Him proclaim,
    Gleams across the mind His light,
    Dare it then deny His reign, the All-upholder?



  which glows star-like across the dark-growing moor, where the sooty
  horse-shoe,--is it a detached, separated speck, cut off from the whole
  smithy-fire was primarily kindled at the Sun; is fed by air that
  therein, with Iron Force, and Coal Force, and the far stranger Force
  brought about; it is a little ganglion, or nervous centre, in the
  Call it, if thou wilt, an
.
 Detached,
  ever stranded, cast aside; but all, were it only a withered leaf,
  flood of action, and lives through perpetual metamorphoses.

*****

  MATTER AND FORCE.

5, 1867, with additions.

London to give courses of evening lectures every year to working men.
The lecture-room holds 600 people; and tickets to this amount are
them.
lectures, that the persons who fail to obtain tickets always bear a
  Indeed, if the lecture-room
benches would be occupied on these occasions.
of remark that the lectures are but rarely of a character which could
  The information acquired
 It
and without regard to its practical application, which animates the

It is also my privilege to lecture to another audience in London,
referred to is composed wholly of the aristocracy of labour.
regards attention and courtesy to the lecturer, neither of these
superiority over the other.
to take those persons who flock to the School of Mines as average
of labour, as I have just called them.
demonstrates that the essential qualities of what we in England
often raised in my mind the wish that the gentlemen of all classes,
sifted from the general mass of the community, and caused to know each

When pressed some months ago by the Council of the British Association
of the working men of London naturally rose to my mind; and, though
decline the request of the Council.
of the Association have been delivered before its members and
  But after the meeting at Nottingham, last year,
late President, Mr.
Huxley, the idea arose of incorporating with all subsequent meetings
the meeting is held.
Committee of Recommendations; the Committee supported the resolution;
and here I am to carry out to the best of my ability their united

*****
Whether it be a consequence of long-continued development, or an
here gifted with a mind curious to know the causes of things, and
desire for an explanation.
the Pacific Islands, that when he first saw himself in a
back.
phenomena of the external world.
the causes and connections of these phenomena.
is the earth, what should we see if we came to the edge of the earth
hail, rain, storm, and snow?  Such questions presented themselves to
knowledge was not implanted in vain.
evident that man's capacities were, so to speak, the complement of
universe was open to the human understanding.
mind of man had the power of penetrating far beyond the boundaries of
depend for their action upon things unseen; in short, that besides the
processes which do not address the senses at all, but which must be,

To the subjects which require this discernment belong the phenomena of
  But to trace the genesis of the notions now
  In the
stone--in the lifting of burdens, and in personal combats, even savage
  Ages of
  He laid by at the proper
become an observer and enquirer.
have profoundly stirred his curiosity.
dropped from a certain tree possessed, when rubbed, the power of
and he also found that a particular stone exerted a similar power over
  I allude, of course, to electrified
attract particles of iron.
enabled our early enquirer to distinguish between a push and a pull.
Augmented experience showed him that in the case of the magnet and the
exerted; and, by a kind of poetic transfer, be applied to things
  The magnet and
words, with exerting force.

pulls was vastly extended by Dr.
scientific fibre, and of finer insight, than Bacon himself.
proved that a multitude of other bodies, when rubbed, exerted the
amber.
nature was rendered familiar.
bodies, between which no visible link or connection existed, possessed
technically called 'action at a distance.

experience.
growth; and this observation of action at a distance provided material
  Bodies were observed to
  Why should they do so?  The earth was proved to
  Why
space?  Supposing it were ascertained that from a part of the earth's
the sun, we might be inclined to conclude that the earth is held in
boy twirls round his head a bullet at the end of a string.
should the chain be needed?  It is a fact of experience that bodies
chain.
why should not the fall of bodies from a height be the result of their
speculations which grow out of the fruitful soil of observation.
Having started with the savage, and his sensations of muscular force,
rubbed amber and the bodies which they attract, rising, by an unbroken
are held together.

the time of Newton.
here, as elsewhere, we find the speculative mind falling back for its
  It had been observed, in the case of
together the stronger was the force exerted between them; while, by
insensible.
earth and the sun would be influenced by their distance asunder.
Guesses had been made as to the exact manner in which the force varied
test of experiment and calculation.
upon a body close to its surface, with its pull upon the moon, 240,000
distance.
conceptions, some of which, indeed, constituted the necessary
  The one which here concerns us is,
the sun, as wholes, but every particle of the sun attracts every
  His conclusion was, that the
their constituent particles.

dwelling upon it; but it really marks a turning point in our notions
  You have probably heard of certain philosophers of the
  These men
which found its consummation at the hands of the illustrious John
  But the Greek and Roman philosophers I have named, and their
and flying through space, hitting each other, and clinging together by
  They missed the central idea that atoms
Against each other, but by their own mutual attractions.
of the great steps taken by Newton.
the conception of _molecular force_.

true working man--who, by analysing the astronomical observations of
they are now known to move.
the planets as Newton did; in fact, Kepler taught Newton and the world
  But this was not enough.
question arose--Why should the facts be so?  This was the great
name and fame immortal.
particle of matter in the solar system attracts every other particle
the particles, he proved that the Planetary motions must be what
  He showed that the moon fell towards
operation of the same force that pulls an apple from its tree.
all-pervading force, which forms the solder of the material universe,
peace, is called the force of gravitation.

magnetism, repulsion had been always seen to accompany attraction.
Electricity and magnetism are double or _polar forces_.
magnetism, experience soon pushed the mind beyond the bounds of
was resident in its molecules.
its centre, and find that one half of the strip attracts, and the
  I break the
throughout its entire length the north pole of a magnetic needle, is
other of which wholly repels, the north pole of the needle.
proves to be as perfect a magnet as the whole.
half and go on till further breaking becomes impossible through the
endowed with two poles, and is, therefore, a perfect magnet.
cannot stop here: you _imagine_ where you cannot _experiment_; and reach
which you see and feel is an assemblage of molecular magnets which you
intellectually discerned.

this kind may exert a certain structural power.
example, that iron filings strewn round a magnet arrange themselves in
'lines of magnetic force.
sheet of paper.
comes into play, and every particle of the iron responds to that
  We have a kind of architectural effort--if I may use the
  Here then is a fact of
material for the mind to operate upon, rendering it possible to attain
remote phenomena.


entirely elude the eye of the body, and must be figured by the eye of
  The processes of chemistry are examples of these.
thinking and experimenting has led philosophers to conclude that
combination, the whole material world is built up.
breathe, for example, as mainly a mechanical mixture of the atoms of
  The water we drink is also composed of oxygen
  But it differs from the air in this particular, that in
chemically combined.
enormous attractions on each other, so that when brought into
force to form a chemical compound.
which these atoms lock themselves together, we have the means of
here receive a few moments' attention.

the one being zinc and the other platinum, not permitting them to
  I connect the two upper ends of the
  The wire is now the channel of
' What
change has occurred, by the external effects produced by the wire.
me show you one or two of these effects.
ten vessels, each with its pair of metals, and I wish to get the added
  The arrangement is called a voltaic battery.
plunge a piece of copper wire among these iron filings; they refuse to
  I employ the selfsame wire to connect the two ends of
 The iron filings now
  I interrupt the current, and
so long as the wire connects the two ends of the battery.

contact of its various parts, and formed into a coil.
part of the wire which connects the two ends of the voltaic battery.
By the attractive force with which it has become suddenly endowed, it
  I twist a covered copper
the voltaic battery, the poker is instantly transformed into a strong
  Two flat spirals are here suspended facing each other, about
  Sending a current through both spirals, they clash
current in one of the spirals, they fly asunder.
are due to the power which we name an electric current, and which we
complete.

compound.

and you see plainly the images of the wires.
send an electric current from wire to wire.
immediately from each of them, and these are the two gases of which
  The oxygen is always liberated on the one
  The gases may be collected either
  I place upon my hand a soap bubble filled with
  Applying a taper to the bubble, a loud
  The atoms have rushed together with detonation,
extracted is the result of their re-union.


development of heat.
suspended from the same point of support by two short strings.
them thus apart and then liberate them.
virtue of their elasticity, they quickly recoil, and a sharp vibratory
  This experiment will enable you to
  We have in the first
translation, as it is usually called--then a recoil, and afterwards a
  To this vibratory motion we give the name of
  Thus, three things are to be kept before the mind--first, the
other; and thirdly, the motion consequent upon the exertion of that
  This motion must be figured first as a motion of translation,
heat.
violent as to prevent the molecules from coming together, the water
  But as the vapour cools, or in

And now we approach a new and wonderful display of force.
the substance remains in a liquid or vaporous condition, the play of
  But as the heat is
combinations.
we give the familiar name of ice.
and their internal structure, the pondering mind has forced upon it
conceptions of polar force; and we infer from our broken magnet that
matter, and that by the play of this force structural arrangement is
  What, in relation to our present question, is the natural
transcend experience, and endow the atoms and molecules of which
repulsions.
while some retreat from each other; atom is added to atom, and
and symmetrically, and in accordance with laws more rigid than those

structural power.

streets and houses and Kinnaird Halls--would not that be wonderful?
water build themselves into the sheets of ice which every winter roof

If I could show you the actual progress of this molecular
  A reversal
  The
from the manner in which they separate, you may to some extent infer
  When a beam is sent from our
intercepted, and the glass is warmed by the portion thus retained
  When the beam is sent through a plate of ice, a portion of
intercepted heat melts it internally.
action of this beam within the ice that I now wish to direct your
  Upon the screen is thrown a magnified image of the slab of
melting it, and enables us to form the image; but the heat is in great
internal liquefaction.
about those points the beam works silently, undoing the crystalline
had been previously locked in a solid embrace.
are rendered visible by strong illumination.
six-petaled flowers breaking out over the white surface, and expanding
  These flowers are
  Under the action of the heat the molecules of the
forms.
reverse process of construction.
accordance with this hexangular type, every ice molecule takes its
  To use
the music of law, which thus renders the commonest substance in nature

It is the function of science, not as some think to divest this
point out the wonder and the mystery of common things.
fern-like forms, which on a frosty morning overspread your
  Breathe upon
crystalline film to the liquid condition; then watch its subsequent
  You will see it all the better if you look at it
  After you have ceased breathing,
moment to be alive.
with molecule, until finally the whole film passes from the state of
repose.

  Over a piece of perfectly clean
dissolved.
  By means of a
the screen.
also heats it; evaporation sets in, and at a certain moment, when the
out over the screen.
by those beautiful forms.
spears, feathered right and left by other spears.
in the middle of the field of view the spears shoot with magical
  The film of water on a window-pane on a
  Latent
marvellous structural power, which only requires the withdrawal of

The clear liquid now held up before you is a solution of nitrate of
  When an electric
acid, as the hydrogen was separated from the oxygen in a former
its molecules are thus successively set free.
and of the two wires which dip into the liquid of the cell, are now
  Let us close the circuit, and send the
  From one of the wires a beautiful silver
  Branches of the metal are
  You have here
in a minute before your eyes.
acetate of lead, which is a compound of lead and acetic acid, the
slowly branching into exquisite metallic ferns, the fronds of which,
bottom of the cell.

matter,' as Dr.
it--when its atoms and molecules are permitted to bring their forces
into forms which rival in beauty those of the vegetable world.
what is the vegetable world itself, but the result of the complex play
matter moves it is force that moves it, and if a certain structure,
forces exerted between the atoms and molecules.

in the first instance, disguised in a transparent liquid; the solid
most part disguised in a transparent gas, which is mixed in small
  This gas is formed by the
  The
analogous to that of the electric current in the case of our lead and
fibre.
its hydrogen is liberated from its oxygen, and lies down side by side
  The oxygen in both cases
  But what is it in
tearing asunder the locked atoms of carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen?  The
  The leaves of plants which absorb both the carbonic
our decompositions took place.
of the silver and the lead found expression in those beautiful
attractions of the liberated carbon and hydrogen find expression in

In the fall of a cataract and the rush of the wind we have examples of
  In the combinations of chemistry and in the
power.
together to form water.
the mighty mechanical energy of their act of combination; but it may
  of hydrogen
 of oxygen to form 9 lbs.
the shock of a weight of 1,000 tons falling from a height of 20 feet
  Now, in order that the atoms of oxygen and
corresponding to this enormous mechanical effect, a certain distance
  It is in rushing over this that the

*****
This idea of distance between the attracting atoms is of the highest
  For the
and molecules which have already combined and thus satisfied their
combined, and whose mutual attractions are, therefore, unsatisfied.
Now, as regards motive power, we are entirely dependent on atoms and
  Their attractions can produce motion,
and it is this atomic motion that we utilise in our machines.
can get power out of oxygen and hydrogen by the act of their union;
on their combination has been expended, no further power can be got
  As dynamic agents they are dead.
materials of the earth's crust consist for the most part of substances
attractions are satisfied.
diffused substance; but granite consists, in great part, of silicon,
and are therefore dead.
a metal called calcium, the atoms of which have already closed in
 In this way we
and satisfy ourselves that though they were sources of power in ages
turning their power to account, they are sources of power no longer.
And here we might halt for a moment to remark on that tendency, so

of their own importance in the system of nature.
before men saw them, and the quantity of power wasted before man could
  We are
the extent of our inheritance, and as brave ones not to whimper if it
  The healthy attitude of mind
whence came the rhodora, joyfully acknowledged his brotherhood with

    I never thought to ask, I never knew,
    The self-same power that brought me there brought you.


A few exceptions to the general state of union of the molecules of the
the total store of which they are the residue--still remain.
constitute our main sources of motive power.
important of these are our beds of coal.
between the atoms of carbon and those of atmospheric oxygen, across
utilise the motion thus produced.
rushed together, so as to form carbonic acid, their mutual attractions
agents they are dead.
mechanical energy, because they have the power of uniting with the
  Passing from plants to animals, we find that the
power.
at bottom the molecular work of the transmuted food and the oxygen of
  We inhale this vital gas, and bring it into sufficiently
  These
towards each other, properly turned to account by the wonderful

One fundamental thought pervades all these statements: there is one
  This is the ancient maxim that
the inorganic is power produced without the expenditure of power; that
motion.
power incessantly introduced upon the earth.
have already stated, is the sun.
carbon from the oxygen of the carbonic acid, and thus enables them to
  Whether they recombine in the furnace of the steam-engine
same.
sun.
celestial pedigree with the meanest of living things.

accepting these statements; they may be frightened by their apparent
minds, expresses something very dreadful.
and avowed that the physical philosopher, as such, must be a pure
 His enquiries deal with matter and force, and with them
  And whatever be the forms which matter and force assume,
coal-beds and forests of the earth, or in the brains and muscles of
them.
direction.
materials together, in a retort or crucible, could make a baby, he
  There is no law, moral or physical, forbidding him to do
  At the present moment there are, no doubt, persons experimenting
materials.
trials that they will learn the limits of their own powers and the

But while thus making the largest demand for freedom of
instrument of intellectual culture and as a ministrant to the material
day to solve, the problem of this universe, I must shake my head in
  You remember the first Napoleon's question, when the savants
the universe, and solved it to their own apparent satisfaction.
looked aloft to the starry heavens, and said, 'It is all very well,
unanswered, and science makes no attempt to answer it.
can see, there is no quality in the human intellect which is fit to be
  It entirely transcends us.
The mind of man may be compared to a musical instrument with a certain
of silence.
intellectual range, and as far as they reach we will at all hazards
  But behind, and above, and around all, the real
concerned, is incapable of solution.
will, with that I have nothing to do.
not be an unworthy one.
holiest thought, but be careful of pretending to know more about it
  Be careful, above all things, of
of Divine pleasure or displeasure.
the fall of the tower of Siloam the anger of the Lord against those
  Doubt equally those who pretend to see in cholera,
  Doubt
monstrous theory that the depreciation of railway scrip is a
  Let them not, as far as
hypotheses.
of questions, and seeing the puerile attempts often made to solve it,
soul, who has made every soul of like nature in these islands his
such interpreters of the ways of God to men:
    The Builder of this universe was wise,
    The plan he formed his worlds and Aeons by,



********************

  pointed out; alike to those who seek materialistic explanations of
  may be found.
  the first prove by their hope, that they believe Mind may possibly be
  materialists are profoundly convinced that there is not the remotest

                                         HERBERT SPENCER.



  SCIENTIFIC MATERIALISM.

Section of the British Association at Norwich.


THE celebrated Fichte, in his lectures on the 'Vocation of the
all-sided.
in a single direction only.
required that the scholar should apply himself directly to nature,
his own, the immense debt he owed to the labours of others.
these which enabled him to supplement the knowledge derived from his

As regards science, Fichte's idea is to some extent illustrated by the
  We have here a
engaged.
supplementing his culture by knowledge drawn from all of them, each
original faculty--one line, along which he may carry the light of his
knowledge is surrounded.
the biologist with the conditions and phenomena of life; the
relations of space and number; the chemist pursues his atoms; while
electrical, acoustical, and other phenomena.
then, as a whole, faces physical nature on all sides, and pushes
what Fichte might call the sphere of natural knowledge.
meetings of the Association it is found necessary to resolve this
respective letters of our Sections.

here they form a single section.
phenomenon may be, whether we observe it in the region of sense, or
mechanical laws.
mathematics are all-powerful as an instrument of deduction.
command of Geometry over the relations of space, and the far-reaching
discovery, and of reaping the entire fruits of discovery.
without mathematics, expressed or implied, our knowledge of physical

Side by side with the mathematical method we have the method of
  Here from a starting-point furnished by his own
intuition and verication.
tries to push it further; he guesses, and checks his guess; he
  These guesses
gained casts a faint light beyond its own immediate boundaries.
is no discovery so limited as not to illuminate something beyond
  The force of intellectual penetration into this penumbral
dependent upon method, but upon the genius of the investigator.
is, however, no genius so gifted as not to need control and
  The profoundest minds know best that Nature's ways are
world of thought are incomplete until they have been proved to have
  Thus the vocation of the
spiritual insight, and its incessant correction and realisation.
experiments constitute a body, of which his purified intuitions are,

Partly through mathematical and partly through experimental research,
the world.
has produced, and it is destined to produce, immense changes--vast
of the origin, rule, and governance of natural things.
the physical world, miracles are wrought, while philosophy is
have been opened, or indicated by, scientific research.
become more and more the case as philosophical writers become more
facts which scientific men have established, and with the great

If you look at the face of a watch, you see the hour and minute-hands,
  Why
are observed to be?  These questions cannot be answered without
relationship to each other.
observed motion of the hands follows of necessity from the inner
spring.
but the case is similar with the phenomena of nature.
their inner mechanism and their store of force to set that mechanism
  The ultimate problem of physical science is to reveal this
action of both, the phenomena of which they constitute the basis,

I thought an attempt to give you even a brief and sketchy illustration
not be uninteresting to you on the present occasion; more especially
limits of modern science; to point out the region which men of science
and also to define, if possible, the bourne between this and that
scientific intellect are directed in vain.

  It was the American Emerson,
strongly, without apparent injustice to some other truth.
often of a dual character, taking the form of a magnet with two poles;
are to be traced to the exclusiveness with which partisan reasoners
 The
each its fair share in the formation of the resultant conviction.
this waiting for the statement of the two sides of a question implies
  It implies a resolution to suppress indignation, if the
repress equally undue elation, if the half-statement should happen to
  It implies a determination to wait calmly
form of either acquiescence or dissent.

 There
productions; and in his early youth Alexander von Humboldt wrote a
 We now
machinery of which no record remains.
swarming workers toiling at those vast erections, lifting the inert
by the whip of the architect, placing them in their proper positions.
The blocks, in this case, were moved and posited by a power external
of its human builder.

a different kind.
evaporated, the water which holds the salt in solution disappears, but
  At a certain stage of concentration
molecules, as they are called, begin to deposit themselves as minute
  As
through the clustering together of innumerable molecules, a finite
  What is this form?  It sometimes
  We have little pyramids
series of steps resembling those up which the traveller in Egypt is
  The human mind is as little disposed to look
the pyramids of Egypt, without enquiring whence they came.
are those salt-pyramids built up?
Guided by analogy, you may, if you like, suppose that, swarming among
population, controlled and coerced by some invisible master, placing
  This, however, is not the
likely one.
other without the intervention of slave labour; that they attract each
in certain definite directions; and that the pyramidal form is the
  While, then, the
these molecular blocks of salt are self-posited, being fixed in their

I take common salt as an illustration, because it is so familiar to us
equally well.
have this formative power, as Fichte would call it--this structural
matter into definite shapes.
regions, is its handiwork, and so also are the quartz, felspar, and
  Our chalk-beds are for the most part composed of
behind the shell, as a whole, lies a more remote and subtle formative
  These shells are built up of little crystals of talc-spar, and,
intangible molecules of carbonate of lime.
of matter to organise itself, to grow into shape, to assume definite
said, all-pervading.
water you drink, in the air you breathe.
manifests itself throughout the whole of what we call inorganic

The forms of the minerals resulting from this play of polar forces are
  Men of science
architecture.
exploration, light, heat, magnetism, electricity, and sound.
light is especially useful and powerful here.
when sent in among the molecules of a crystal, is acted on by them,
in which the molecules are arranged.
exist between the inner structure of rocksalt and that of crystallised
  These actions
the play of molecular force being so regulated as to cause the removal
left with increased intensity behind.

mineral, to a living grain of corn.
polarised light, chromatic phenomena similar to those noticed in
  And why?  Because the architecture of the
  In the grain also the molecules
arrangement they act upon the light.
molecules of the corn?  Regarding crystalline architecture, I have
molecules to be placed in position by a Power external to themselves.
The same hypothesis is open to you now.
crystals you have rejected this notion of an external architect, I
conclude that the molecules of the corn, also, are posited by the
  It would be poor
it in the other.

the action of polarised light, let us place it in the earth, and
  In other words, let the
that state of agitation which we call heat.
circumstances, the grain and the substances which surround it
  A bud
sun's rays, which are also to be regarded as a kind of vibratory
  And as the motion of common heat, with which the grain and
and these substances to exercise their mutual attractions and
motion of the sun's rays now enables the green bud to feed upon the
  The bud appropriates
and permits the other constituent to return to the atmosphere.
the architecture is carried on.
are active in the blade, the matter of the air and the matter of the
  We have in
molecular action being completed by the production of grains, similar

Now there is nothing in this process which necessarily eludes the
  An intellect the
to follow the whole process from beginning to end.
molecule placed in its position by the specific attractions and
and its consummation, being an instance of the play of molecular
  Given the grain and its environment, with their respective
trace out _à priori_ every step of the process of growth, and, by the
cycle must end, as it is seen to end, in the reproduction of forms
  A necessity rules here, similar to

You will notice that I am stating the truth strongly, as at the
  But I must go still further,
the product of molecular force as the chalk and the ear of corn, or as
  Many of the parts of the body are
  Take the human heart, for example, with its

being produced by the same chemical process.
as certainly derived from the food of the animal, as the motion of
  As regards
nothing.
stature?  All that has been said, then, regarding the plant, may be
  Every particle that enters into
its position by molecular force.
these matters be denied, and the element of caprice introduced, we
its environment, its position in the body might be determined
  Our difficulty is not with the _quality_ of the
the simple expansion of the faculties we now possess.
expansion, with the necessary molecular data, and the chick might be
of Neptune from the disturbances of Uranus, or as conical refraction

You see I am not mincing matters, but avowing nakedly what many
  The formation of
mechanical problem, which differs from the problems of ordinary
processes involved.
now glance at the other half.
mechanism of the animal body we have phenomena no less certain than
necessary connection.
think,' 'I love;' but how does consciousness infuse itself into the
feeling: when we are hurt, the brain feels it; when we ponder, or when
instrumentality of the brain.
precise here.
thinker, who has reflected upon the subject, unwilling to admit the
consciousness, whether in the domain of sense, thought, or emotion, a
brain; or who would be disposed even to deny that if the motion, or
effect on consciousness will be the same?  Let any nerve, for example,
would be communicated to it by the pulses of a heated body, surely
subjective intimation exactly as if it were objective.
be excited by purely mechanical means.
luminous flash, and the mere pressure of the finger on the external
a peacock's tail.
but, in all such cases, could we examine the organs implicated, we
molecular condition which the real objects, if present, would

The relation of physics to consciousness being thus invariable, it
or feeling might be inferred: or, given the thought or feeling, the
  But how inferred?
empirical association.
science are of this character--the inference, for example, that an
in a definite way.
from the current to the needle, if not demonstrable, is conceivable,
the problem.
corresponding facts of consciousness is inconceivable as a result of
  Granted that a definite thought, and a definite molecular
intellectual organ, nor apparently any rudiment of the organ, which
the other.
  Were our
enable us to see and feel the very molecules of the brain; were we
electric discharges, if such there be; and were we intimately
should be as far as ever from the solution of the problem, 'How are
The chasm between the two classes of phenomena would still remain
  Let the consciousness of love, for
molecules of the brain, and the consciousness of hate with a
  We should then know, when we love, that
in the other; but the WHY?' would remain as unanswerable as before.

thought, as exercised by us, has its correlative in the physics of the
that position is a tenable one.
finally to maintain this position against all attacks; but I do not
beyond this position.
molecular groupings, and motions, explain everything.

  The utmost he can affirm is the
he is in absolute ignorance.
and soul is as insoluble, in its modern form, as it was in the
  Phosphorus is known to enter into the composition
Phosphor, kein Gedanke!' That may or may not be the case; but even if
darkness.
he is equally helpless.
which we have been discoursing--who or what divided it into molecules,
forms--he has no answer.

else is prepared with a solution?  To whom has this arm of the Lord
priest and philosopher, one and all.

day.
amelioration.
contemporaries, to the President and Members of the British
  And whether we regard the improvement from the
progressive development, or of successive exhibitions of creative
faculties end the series, that the process of amelioration ends with
  A time may therefore come when this ultra-scientific region, by
human, investigation.
to arouse the sense of vision.
requisite for their translation into light does not exist.
from this region of darkness and mystery which surrounds us, rays may
intellectual organs to translate them into knowledge as far surpassing
held possession of this planet.
its uses.
a power which has feeling, not knowledge, for its base.
will be, and I hope is turned to account, both in steadying and
which, in the struggle for existence, or for precedence in the world,

__________________
Musings on the Matterhorn, July 27, 1868.

crags saddened me.
strength; here we had inexorable decay.
implied a reference to a period when the Matterhorn was in the full
  Thought naturally ran back to its remoter
  Nor did thought halt there, but wandered on
regarded, and with good reason, as the proximate source of all
  I tried to look at this universal cloud, containing
to imagine it as the seat of those forces whose action was to issue in
  Did that
Matterhorn?  Did the _thought_ which now ran back to it simply return to
matter and force; for, if life and thought be the very flower of both,
untrue.
goal of man has not been yet attained; if his development has not been
necessary to the opening of a finer vision, to the budding and the
at my own body, at my strength and weakness, even at these ponderings,
more about these matters than I do; what is my answer?  Supposing our
dissipated; and the warmth of denial which they excite, and which, as
same time; would the undeflected human mind return to the meridian of
such a position one of stable equilibrium?  The channels of thought
could run athwart consciousness during a ten minutes' halt upon the



********************

  These three alone lead life to sovereign power.
  Yet not for power (power of herself
  Acting the law we live by without fear;
  Were wisdom in the scorn of consequence.




  AN ADDRESS TO STUDENTS.

]
THERE is an idea regarding the nature of man which modern philosophy
namely, of secular growth.
imagine that the slightest controversial tinge is imported into this
  Whether
fire, I know not; if he had any such origin the process of his
old legend, according to which 'the Lord God formed man of the dust of
became a living soul.
growth is not to be denied.
through the ages have slowly transformed him from what he was into
  The doctrine has been held that the mind of the child is
characters we please.
correction.
with a view of affecting its inner texture, if we wish to predict the
opposes the internal forces of the body itself; and in bringing the
also must be taken into account.
inherited capacities and tendencies, labelled 'from the indefinite
to the other through the education of the present time.
that education is, or ought to be, to provide wise exercise for his
exercise and this direction to furnish his mind with such knowledge as
life.

rival methods now solicit attention,--the one organised and equipped,
present state of perfection; the other, more or less chaotic, but
source of knowledge and as a means of discipline.
are the classical and the scientific method.
rivals; it is only bigotry and short-sightedness that make them so;
  Though
nevertheless hold the opinion that the proper study of a language is
  If I except
English grammar was the most important discipline of my boyhood.
piercing through the involved and inverted sentences of 'Paradise
relative to its distant antecedent, of the agent to the object of the
governed, the study of variations in mood and tense, the
structure of a sentence--all this was to my young mind a discipline of
  How I rejoiced
to a corner from which there was no escape!  As I speak, some of the
  For
is left, as it were, floating in mid air without any verb to support
  I speak thus of English because it was of real value to me.
not speak of other languages because their educational value for me
  But knowing the value of English so well, I
involved in the proper study of Latin and Greek.

  It is, as
  It is
of youth; and it can point to results in the achievements of our
  What, then, has science to offer which is in the least
than by recurring to the grand old story from which I have already
  Speaking of the world and all that therein is, of the sky and
he had made, and behold it was very good.
thus described which science offers to the study of man.
very renowned argument much prized and much quoted by theologians, in
  Let us deal practically
  Supposing a watchmaker, having completed his
what would you understand him to mean?  You would not suppose that he
behind, so much as to the wheels and pinions, the springs and jewelled
which enable the watch to perform its work as a keeper of time.
regard to the knowledge of such a watch he would be a mere ignoramus
  I do not wish to
very loud in their praise of the works of the Lord know them only in
  It is the inner works of the
that she recommends as a discipline worthy of all acceptation.

lowest condition of divisibility, and force to its simplest
the world as it stands.
solution of this problem; and when the solution comes, it will be more
  But though we
nature, we have conquered vast regions of it, have learned their
  We live upon a ball of 8,000
  This
water.
and modes of action, which offer problems to the intellect, some
philosopher.
space.
  It is illuminated
be brought virtually into our closets and there subjected to
  It has its winds and clouds, its rain and frost, its
  And it has its vast
  To a most amazing extent the
runs through them.
relationship, science might, as a means of discipline, suffer in
  But the whole body of phenomena is instinct
science as a means of discipline consists in the motion of the
marked out by phenomena.
already referred as derivable from the study of languages,--that, and
  Indeed, I believe
physics as to render the mental exercise involved in it almost
language.

this question.
  If he were so, science
  But he feels as well as
true.
complete man is, consciously or unconsciously, sustained by an
  It is vain to attempt to separate the
  Let a man but observe
ten, the emotions constitute the motive force which pushes his
  The reading of the works of two men, neither
indeed, friendly to that spirit--has placed me here to-day.
are the English Carlyle and the American Emerson.
gratefully remember that through three long cold German winters
o'clock every morning--not slavishly, but cheerfully, meeting each
vanquished not to shrink from difficulty.
through Analytical Geometry and the Calculus had it not been for those
  I never should have become a physical investigator, and hence
  They told me what I
intellectual action is to be traced to this purely moral source.
Carlyle and Emerson I ought to add Fichte, the greatest representative
  These three unscientific men made me a practical
  They called out 'Act!'  I hearkened to the
direction which effort was to take.

  I
result.
physical.
active, but we cannot suddenly change the nature of man.
birth' itself implies the pre-existence of a character which requires
  You cannot by any amount of
Christian.
or of a day.
man knows what the potentialities of any human mind may be, requiring
  There are in the mineral
which have lain darkly in the earth for ages, but which nevertheless
  In their case the
molecular detent.
lifted, and an outflow of light immediately begins.
many of you may be in the condition of this fluor-spar.
know, every one of you may be in this condition, requiring but the
detent, and to render you conscious of light and warmth within

The circle of human nature, then, is not complete without the arc of
  The lilies of the field have a value for us beyond
the declaration that 'Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like
' The sound of the village bell has a value beyond its
  The setting sun has a value beyond its optical one.
The starry heavens, as you know, had for Immanuel Kant a value beyond
  I think it very desirable to keep this
philosopher to draw down his shutters between you and it.
dead languages, which are sure to be beaten by science in the purely
  They supplement the
must on this account be cherished by all who desire to see human
  There must be a reason for the fascination which
minds--a fascination which will probably continue for men of Greek and

In connection with this question one very obvious danger besets many
endeavouring to give the feelings repose.
systems of theology and philosophy which were taught to us when young,
proved to be attainable.
remain in suspense, the data on which a decision might be based being
  This discipline of suspending the judgment is a common one in
  I walked down
acquirements, discussing with him various theological questions.
could not accept his views of the origin and destiny of the universe,
  He
universe.
mystery of mysteries seemed, to my friend a matter of course.
not even a theory of magnetism' was my reply.
wait.
those expounders of the ways of God to men, who offer us intellectual

The teachers of the world ought to be its best men, and for the
 By the fullness
in others.
passing away, and our trust henceforth must rest on the innate
  And here, I think, the poet will have
  To him, when
discipline which it assuredly demands, we have a right to look for
  To
recession of the theologic tide has left exposed.
science, he may freely deal with conceptions which science shuns, and



Let me utter one practical word in conclusion--take care of your
  There have been men who by wise attention to this point might
great poems, commanded armies, or ruled states, but who by unwise
  Imagine Hercules as
of his stroke expedite the ruin of his craft?  Take care then of the
either wet or dry rot amongst them.
accomplished by desultory or intermittent efforts of the will, but by
  The will no doubt has sometimes to put forth
  But the

your chance of recovery when overthrown.





    Chaunted when the sphere was young,
    O wise man, hear'st thou half it tells?
    The early genesis of things;
    Of star-dust and star-pilgrimages,
    Of the old floods' subsiding slime,
    Of poles and powers, cold, wet, and warm.
    The rushing metamorphosis
    Melts things that be to things that seem,
'
                                  EMERSON.

    Was waer' ein Gott der nur von aussen stiesse,
    Ihm ziemt's, die Welt im Innern zu bewegen,
'
                                     GOETHE.


  SCIENTIFIC USE OF THE IMAGINATION.

Liverpool, September 16, 1870.

teach us the actual value and right use of the Imagination--of that
into a wilderness of perplexities and errors, a land of mists and
becomes the noblest attribute of man; the source of poetic genius, the
would never have invented fluxions, nor Davy have decomposed the
Continent.
Benjamin Brodie, November 30, 1859.

work.
spur up the emotions, on which so much depends, as well as to nourish
comprising two volumes of poetry, Goethe's 'Farbenlehre,' and the work
 Alexander Bain.
noble otherwise, I chiefly noticed the self-inflicted hurts of genius,
  Mr.
I found, for the most part, learned and practical, shining generally
strength, which proved that even logicians share the common fire of
  He interested me most when he became the mirror of my own
  Neither intellectually nor socially is it good for man to
find that they have been experienced by another.
passages in his book I could infer that Mr.
such sorrows.
which we all from time to time experience, Mr.
uncertainty where to look for the next opening of discovery brings the
' These words have in
  The action of the
  He grapples with a subject of enquiry,
time being.
another field.
is not always one of pure repose.
discomfort--of gloom and ennui.
the next opening of discovery brings the pain of conflict and the
' It was under such conditions that I had to

*****
The disciplines of common life are, in great part, exercises in the
by such exercises, the public mind is, to some extent, prepared for
  Assuming this preparation on
you to trace, some of the more occult features and operations of Light
  I wished, if possible, to take you beyond the boundary of
discerned, and to show you there the hidden mechanism of optical

But how are those hidden things to be revealed?  Philosophers may be
events, carry it a long way from its origin.
diminish, qualify, and combine experiences, so as to render them fit
  In explaining sensible phenomena, we
  There are Tories
avoided rather than employed.
vessels, and are unduly impressed by its disasters.
with equal justice point to exploded boilers as an argument against
  With accurate experiment and observation to work
  Newton's
prepared imagination, without which the 'laws of Kepler' could never
  Out of the facts of chemistry
  Davy
its exercise was incessant, preceding, accompanying and guiding all
  His strength and fertility as a discoverer is to be
  Scientific
connotations; but the fact is that without the exercise of this power,
and sequences.
night, of summer and winter; but the conception of Force would vanish
that science which is now binding the parts of nature to an organic

I should like to illustrate by a few simple instances the use that
indicate afterwards some of the further uses that they are likely to
  Let us begin with the rudimentary experiences.
the falling of heavy rain-drops into a tranquil pond.
strikes the water becomes a centre of disturbance, from which a series
  Gravity and inertia are the agents
suffice to show that the rate of propagation does not amount to a foot
  A series of slight mechanical shocks is experienced by a
 But
  If the head
the tick of the drop is heard.
propagated, not at the rate of a foot, but at the rate of 4,700 feet a
  In this case it is not the gravity but the elasticity of the
  Every liquid particle pushed against its
is propagated as a thrill.
illustrated by the famous Florentine experiment, is a measure of its
degree, the rapid transmission of a sound-pulse through water is to be

But water, as you know, is not necessary to the conduction of sound;
  And you know that when the air
temperature of freezing water, the velocity of sound in it is 1,090
  It is almost exactly one-fourth of the velocity in
tends to diminish the velocity, the enormous molecular elasticity of
 By
declare themselves we know the length and frequency of the sonorous
methods by which the air is thrown into vibration.
phenomena and laws of vibrating rods, of organ-pipes, strings,
  We can abolish one sound by another.
know the physical meaning of music and noise, of harmony and discord.
In short, as regards sound in general, we have a very clear notion of

In the phenomena of sound, we travel a very little way from downright
  Still the imagination is to some extent
  The bodily eye, for example, cannot see the condensations
  We construct them in thought,
itself.
where a new use is to be made of it.
mechanism of sound, we desire to know the cause and mechanism of
  We wish to extend our enquiries from the auditory to the optic
  There is in the human intellect a power of expansion--I might
simple brooding upon facts.
chaos may have originated in experience of this power.
now before us it has manifested itself by transplanting into space,
mechanism of sound.
depends.
preserve its elasticity constant, we augment the velocity.
heighten the elasticity, and keep the density constant, we also
  A small density, therefore, and a great
  Now
second.
in space a medium of the requisite tenuity and elasticity.

one or two other necessary qualities, let us handle it in accordance
  Let us then carry our results from the
deductions do not issue in the very phenomena of light which ordinary
  If in all the multiplied
entangled description, this fundamental conception always brings us
from it be found in external nature, but on all sides agreement and
in other cases, it actually forces upon our attention phenomena which
imagined--such a conception, must, we think, be something more than a
  In forming it, that composite
we believe, led us into a world not less real than that of the senses,
great extent, the outcome.

any other theoretic conception.
well to keep the theory of a luminiferous aether plastic and capable
  You may, moreover, urge that, although the phenomena occur
is still wanting.
validity as it may fairly claim.
to form a fair estimate of its force.
are surrounded by reasonable beings like yourself.
as firmly convinced of this as of anything.
this conviction?  Simply and solely this: your fellow-creatures behave
accounts for the facts.
our President is a reasonable being.
of superposition by which any one of us can apply himself
regards the possession of reason.
President to be reasonable, it is because he behaves _as if_ he were
  As in the case of the aether, beyond the _'as if'_ you
  Nay, I should not wonder if a close comparison of the data
conclude that the aether had the best of it.

vehicle, not the origin, of wave-motion.
but it does not create.
For the most part from luminous bodies.
body I do not mean its sensible motion, such as the flicker of a
sun.
luminous body.
  Many
real things.
sharp, mechanically intelligible atomic theory enunciated by Dalton,
proportions' their intellectual bourne.
I think it is here misplaced.
notions of atoms and molecules accept, without hesitation, the
  Like you and me they one and all believe
  Let us consider what this
  Bring your imaginations once more into play, and
  Follow them up to
vibrating body.
be an organ-pipe, or it may be a stretched string.
manner a train of aether-waves to their source; remembering at the
motions subject to, and determined by, mechanical laws.
you expect to find as the source of a series of aether-waves?  Ask
numerical ratio in a state of oscillation?  I do not think it will.
You cannot crown the edifice with this abstraction.
imagination, which is here authoritative, demands, as the origin and
quite as definite, though it may be excessively minute, as that which
  Such a particle we name an atom or a
  I think the intellect, when focussed so as to give
the last.


With the view of preserving thought continuous throughout this
from causing any rent in our picture, I here propose to run rapidly
which I am anxious to make familiar to you all.
in the aether by the swinging atoms of luminous bodies are of
  The amplitude is the width of swing
  In water-waves it is the
wave is the horizontal distance between two consecutive crests.
aggregate of waves emitted by the sun may be broadly divided into two
vision.
themselves in size, form, and force.
these waves is about twice that of the smallest, but the amplitude of
 Now the
sensation, means the intensity of the light, is proportional to the
  Hence the amplitude being one-hundredfold,
that of the smallest.
  I use these figures not
the differences that probably exist among the light-giving waves.
if we take the whole range of solar radiation into account--its
force, or energy, of the largest wave is more than a million times

Turned into their equivalents of sensation, the different light-waves
  Red, for example, is produced by the
wave of intermediate length and amplitude.
a more highly refracting substance, such as glass or water, or the
most.
waves from each other; in other words, of analysing the light.

in different degrees from their direct course, the red least, the
  They are virtually pulled asunder, and they paint upon a
'  Strictly
of language, and of our powers of distinction, cause it to be divided


Separately, or mixed in various proportions, the solar waves yield all
  Collectively,
  Pure unsifted solar light
in the same proportion, the light, though diminished in intensity,
  The whiteness of snow with the sun shining upon
  The same snow under an overcast
  Such a firmament enfeebles the light by
Alpine summit, for instance, or on the top of Snowdon--and see, in the
dazzlingly white.
impinging on them into two parts--a reflected part and a transmitted
the impression of whiteness are sensibly preserved.

all the waves were diminished _equally_, or by the same absolute
  They must be reduced _proportionately_, instead of equally.
If by the act of reflection the waves of red light are split into
orange, green, and blue, must also be split into exact halves.
short, the reduction must take place, not by absolutely equal
  In white light the
must always be immense.
correlative, blue, of the smaller waves would have the upper hand in

Not only are the waves of aether reflected by clouds, by solids, and
air to light, a portion of the wave-motion is always reflected.
our atmosphere changes continually in density from top to bottom.
will help our conceptions if we regard it as made up of a series of
density throughout, a small and sudden change of density occurring in
  Light would be reflected at the limiting
the same as that of the real atmosphere.
imagination to picture this act of reflection.
the reflected light?  The atmospheric layers turn their convex
power; and you will immediately perceive that the light regularly
dispersed in space.
light of the sky.

aerial layers to the earth, there is indubitable evidence to show that
  Proofs of the most
that we receive light at the same time from all parts of the
  The light of the firmament comes to us across
solar rays; and this lateral and opposing rush of wave-motion can only
something suspended in the air.
action of clouds, the solar light is not reflected by the sky in the
  The sky is blue, which indicates an
  In accounting for the colour of the sky,
the air blue?  The blueness of the air has, in fact, been given as a
  But how, if the air be blue, can
of air, be yellow, orange, or even red?  The passage of white solar

The hypothesis of a blue air is therefore untenable.
agent, whatever it is, which sends us the light of the sky, exercises
  The light reflected is blue, the
  A marked distinction is thus
cloud, which exercises no such dichroitic action.

mystery.
aether, but reflects them all alike.
action.
large, in comparison with the waves of aether, as to reflect them all
  A broad cliff reflects an Atlantic roller as easily as
reflecting surfaces, the existing differences of magnitude among the
  But supposing the reflecting
with the size of the waves.
being fronted and thrown back, a small portion only is shivered off.
The great mass of the wave passes over such a particle without
  Scatter, then, a handful of such minute foreign particles
solar waves.
see at every collision a portion of the impinging wave struck off; all
being thus acted upon.

of billows to ripples, we have to consider whether those extremely
proportion.
clear that they are not--the production of colour must be an incident
  Largeness is a thing of relation; and the smaller
the wave impinges, and the greater also the ratio of the portion
ring-ripples produced by heavy raindrops on a tranquil pond, will
a larger wave thrown back by the same pebble might be infinitesimal.
Now we have already made it clear to our minds that to preserve the
but in the act of division performed by these very small particles the
scattered by the particles, and, as a consequence, in the scattered
  The other colours of the
  They are
  We ought, in fact, to have them all, but

We have here presented a case to the imagination, pad, assuming the
our way to the conclusion, that were particles, small in comparison to
scattered by those particles would be exactly such as we observe in
  When this light is analysed, all the colours of the
our conclusion.
colour.

among the particles.
successive collisions with the particles the white light is more and
its due proportion of blue.
  The
yellowish.
distances increase, and consequently the number of the scattering
  They abstract in succession the violet, the indigo, the
  The transmitted
red.
  Thus, while the
the transmitted light gives us at sunset the warm crimson of the
  The phenomena certainly occur as if our atmosphere were
exceedingly small foreign particles.

' It is one of the
sprout, if it can, on the weak points of our philosophy.
constitution defies the parasite, and in our case, as we question the
malady of doubt is completely extirpated.
naturally arises is this: Can small particles be really proved to act
  Each one of you can submit
 Water will not dissolve resin,
is dropped into water, the resin immediately separates in solid
  The coarseness of this
  You can
particles.
produce particles particularly suited to our present purpose.
gramme of clean mastic is dissolved in eighty-seven grammes of
a beaker containing clear water, kept briskly stirred.
fine precipitate is thus formed, which declares its presence by its
  Placing a dark surface behind the beaker, and
is seen to be distinctly blue.
may be seen on exceptional days among the Alps, but it is a very fair
  A trace of soap in water gives a tint of blue.
I fear Liverpool, milk makes an approximation to the same colour,
irreverently disclosed the fact that the deepest blue eye is simply a

*****
The action of turbid media upon light was illustrated by Goethe, who,
experiments to regard the firmament as an illuminated turbid medium,
  He describes glasses showing a
light.
real nature of the action of small particles on the waves of aether,
  I am not aware that
] describes
 [Footnote: This glass, by reflected light,
horse-chestnut bark.
decoction: 'Man nehme einen Streifen frischer Rinds von der
kuerzesten Zeit werden wir das vollkommenste Himmelblau entstehen
'--Goethe's Werke, B.
 p.
]
Capital specimens of such glass are to be found at Salviati's, in St.
James's Street.
this description.
of a picture often present the appearance of the bloom of a plum.
rubbing the varnish with a silk handkerchief optical continuity is
  Some years ago I witnessed Mr.
Hirst experimenting at Zermatt on the turbid water of the Visp.
kept still for a day or so, the grosser matter sank, but the finer
water.
part due to this cause.
cases of a similar kind.
Principal Forbes showed that steam issuing from the safety-valve of a
its condensation the colours of the sky.
light, and orange or red by transmitted light.
pointed out by Goethe, is to some extent exhibited by peat-smoke.
than ten years ago, I amused myself by observing, on a calm day at

pine, and its upper portion against a bright cloud.
former case was blue, being seen mainly by reflected light; in the

Alps, but it was a step in this direction.
above referred to looks yellowish by transmitted light; but, by duly
as ruby-coloured as the sun, when seen through Liverpool smoke, or
  I do not, however, point to the gross smoke
because such smoke soon absorbs and destroys the waves of blue,

These multifarious facts, and numberless others which cannot now be
where the scattering particles are small in comparison to the
of the smaller waves, and in the transmitted light a greater
light.
blue is predominant, and in the other orange or red.
microscopes can readily reveal objects not more than 1/50000th of an
  This is less than the length of a wave of red
  Indeed a first-rate microscope would enable us to discern
the visible spectrum.
measured cilia 1/200000th of an inch in diameter.
]  By the
  If they be as large
seen, it is because they are smaller.
hands of our President a liquid containing Bruecke's precipitate.
liquid was milky blue, and Mr.
microscopic power.
1/100000th of an inch in diameter existed in the liquid, they could
  But no particles were seen.
microscope the turbid liquid was not to be distinguished from
 [Footnote: Like Dr.
the particles of mastic passed, without sensible hindrance, through
  By such filtering no freedom from suspended
  The application of a condensed beam to the
]
But we have it in our power to imitate, far more closely than we have
  We can
with the natural one, as regards the exhibition of a number of wholly
  By a continuous process of growth, moreover, we
matter on the one side, and with molar matter, or matter in sensible
  In illustration of this, I will take an


oxygen and one of sulphur constituting the molecule of sulphurous
  It has been recently shown that waves of aether issuing from a
shake asunder the atoms of gaseous molecules.
Chemical Reactions produced by Light,' vol.
]  A chemist would
examining the power and function of the imagination, to keep

molecules of sulphurous acid are shaken asunder by the aether-waves.
Enclosing sulphurous acid in a suitable vessel, placing it in a dark
nothing: the vessel containing the gas seems as empty as a vacuum.
Soon, however, along the track of the beam a beautiful sky-blue colour
particles of sulphur.
becomes whitish; and ends in a more or less perfect white.
action is continued long enough, the tube is filled with a dense cloud
rendered individually visible.
 Morren was mistaken in
any share in the production of the 'actinic clouds' described by me.
beautiful case of molecular instability in the presence of light is
 1878.

liberate a body--sulphur--which at ordinary temperatures is a solid,
  We have
the retina sensibly with scattered light.
coalesce and form _particles_, which grow larger by continual accretion,
  In this
an amount of wave-motion to the retina, sufficient to produce the
  The particles continue, or may be caused to
microscope can cope with them.
by insensible gradations into the state of _cloud_, when they can no
  Thus, without solution of continuity, we
sky-matter being the middle term of the series of transformations.
Instead of sulphurous acid, we might choose a dozen other substances,
  In the case of
in the firmamental condition for fifteen or twenty minutes under the
  During these fifteen or twenty
the size requisite to the production of the celestial blue.

it is possible to state with great distinctness which vessel contains
  The eye is very sensitive to differences of
darkness, and the wave-motion thrown against the retina is small.
larger particles declare themselves by the greater whiteness of their
  Call now to mind the observation, or effort at
particles of mastic in Bruecke's medium, and when you have done this,

A beam of light is permitted to act upon a certain vapour.
minutes the azure appears, but at the end of fifteen minutes it has
  After fifteen minutes its colour, and some
particles than those sought for in vain by Mr.
  These
an inch in diameter.

particles which have been growing continually for fifteen minutes, and
defied the microscope of Mr.
these particles at the beginning of their growth?_  What notion can you
space give us simply a bewildering sense of vastness, without leaving
have here to do, bewilder us equally in the opposite direction.
are dealing with infinitesimals, compared with which the test objects

From their perviousness to stellar light, and other considerations,
density and weight of comets.
mysterious bodies sometimes throw out tails 100,000,000 miles in
  The diameter of our earth is
  Both it and the sky, and a good portion of space beyond

make it our unit of measure.
just mentioned, about 300,000 such measures would have to be emptied
  Now suppose the whole of this stuff to be swept together,
John Herschel would probably tell you that the whole mass might be
  In fact,
horse-power to remove the cometary dust.
regard as monstrous a notion I have sometimes entertained, concerning
  Suppose a shell to surround the
that hangs in the lower regions of the air--say at the height of the
  Outside this shell we should have the deep
  Let the atmospheric space beyond the shell be swept
  What would be its
would contain it all.
portmanteau--possibly his snuff-box--might take it in.
the actual sky be capable of this amount of condensation or not, I
appearance, could be formed from a quantity of matter which might be

Small in mass, the vastness in point of number of the particles of our
  It is not in
revealed.
uniform and coherent as if it formed the surface of the most
  A marble dome would not exhibit a stricter
  And Mr.
hypothetical shell were lifted to twice the height of Mont Blanc above

 They
the slopes of pine.
to abolish their definition.
dissolved in opalescent air.
from the sky-particles against the retina may be quenched, and then

 iv.
 3, vol.
]
withdrawal of a veil.
eye, not the particles acting as opaque bodies, that interferes with
  By day this light quenches the stars; even by
fifth and the eleventh magnitude.
the feebler stellar radiance to a whisper drowned by the noise.

celebrated De la Rive ascribes the haze of the Alps in fine weather to
  Now the possible existence of germs in such
  It has been affirmed that
existence in the requisite numbers, without invasion of the solar
spontaneous generation.
opponents of the germ theory of epidemic disease, who have
balance to decide the question.
on a defective acquaintance with the powers and properties of matter.
Without committing myself in the least to De la Rive's notion, to the
I would simply draw attention to the demonstrable fact, that, in the
balance, which do not darken the air, and which exist, nevertheless,
hyperbole regarding the sands upon the sea-shore.


be, to some extent, accounted for by that doctrine of Relativity which
  This doctrine affirms that
circumstances, depend upon our previous state.
the same height, the one having ascended to it from the plain, the
differently affected by the scene around them.
expanding, to the other it is contracting, and impressions which have
  In our
part.
mainly occupied himself with observation; the other educated in the
atoms and molecules to which we have so frequently referred, a bit of
differently.
climbs to it from his molecular lowlands.
small, to the other large.
the most minute forms of life revealed by the microscope.
the men these naturally appear conterminous with the ultimate
organism.
both.
the microscopic field are as behemoth and leviathan.
relativity may to some extent explain the different attitudes of two
 An
the other; and while to the one the last bold defence and startling
 Bastian will appear perfectly
labour of demolition on subsequent investigators.
these words were uttered I did not imagine that the chief labour of
  1878.

form a very inadequate estimate of the distance which separates the
sometimes employ a phraseology calculated to mislead.
example, the contents of a cell are described as perfectly homogeneous
discover any structure; or when two structures are pronounced to be
think the microscope begins to play a mischievous part.
consideration will make it plain that the microscope can have no voice
  Distilled water is more perfectly
  What is it that causes
until it freezes?  We have here a structural process of which the
conceivable extension of its powers.
field of an electro-magnet, and bring a microscope to bear upon it.
Will any change be observed when the magnet is excited?  Absolutely
  First of
and secondly, in virtue of the structure impressed upon it by the
fashion perfectly determinate both as to quantity and direction.

formed in the laboratories of nature and of man no structure?

limit, and the true molecular limit, there is room for infinite
  It is in this region that the poles of
that when these poles and powers have free action, proper stimulus,
afterwards the complete organism.
atoms, on which all subsequent action depends, baffles a keener power
  When duly pondered, the complexity of
that is nil, but whether we ourselves possess the intellectual
structural energies of nature.
"one sort of living substance" I must guard against being supposed to
  Hyaline
to its complexity of structure.
Medical Journal,' January 16, 1875.
and its correlative caution.
 Sanderson' s important
above.

 Darwin has drawn heavily upon the
  He has drawn heavily upon time in
in his theory of pangenesis.
already microscopic, is a world of minor germs.
organism as a whole wrapped up in the germ, but every organ of the
  This, I say, is an adventurous
forces.
bounds of reason, that he is unwittingly sinning against observed fact
wittingly against either fact or law--we ought, I think, to be
  If there be the least
such a mind.
though the possibility may never be drawn upon.
to think that the facts and reasonings of this discourse tend rather
 Darwin, than towards his
and force, as regards divisibility and distribution, to bear the

In the case of Mr.
combined have run back with wonderful sagacity and success over a
  Guided by
primordial germ, from which he conceived the amazing variety of the
  If this
  The human mind
attempt, would enquire into the history of its genesis.
twilight of conjecture the searcher welcomes every gleam, and seeks to
  He studies the methods of
the course of speculation in antecedent ages and worlds.
the certainty possessed by experimental enquiry is here shut out, we
  From the examination of the
bodies once formed parts of the same undislocated mass; that matter in
rolled away, heat was wasted, condensation followed, planets were
by self-compression, the magnitude and density of our sun.
itself offers evidence of a fiery origin; and in our day the
spectrum analysis, which proves the same substances to be common to

Accepting some such view of the construction of our system as
our planet with the past.
ancestry.
understand it, could not have been present on the earth.
did it come there?  The thing to be encouraged here is a reverent
licentiousness in speculation--while the thing to be repressed, both
  And here I am in the hands of
  I have no right to
like clouds, or gathering to more solid consistency, in the modern
  But if you wish me to speak plainly,
  On the present


Well, your answer is given, and I obey your call.

discussion at the end of a lecture by a very remarkable man.
four hundred clergymen were present at the lecture.
with the civilisation of Egypt in the time of 'Joseph; pointing out
chariots, in one of which Joseph rode, as proving a long antecedent
  He then passed on to the mud of the Nile, its
handiwork found therein: thence to the rocks which bound the Nile
  Thus in his own clear
indefinitely before the minds of his audience, and he contrasted this
  During his discourse he
was opposing a general conviction.
subsequent discussion; so did I.
no adverse current, no opposing conviction, no resistance; merely here
his talk.
the antiquity of the earth and of its life.
it all long ago, and they rallied the lecturer for coming amongst them
  It was quite plain that this large body of
samples of their class, had entirely given up the ancient landmarks,
distant past.

life belong to what we call matter, or is it an independent principle
conditions became such as to permit of the development of life?  Let
which we all were cradled, and which are the undeniable historic
  I say, let us put the

period of its history the earth was not, nor was it fit to be, the
  Whether this was ever a nebulous period, or merely a
condition, it is because the probabilities are really on its side.
question is this: Did creative energy pause until the nebulous matter
had so far withdrawn from the earth's vicinity as to permit a crust to
until the seas were formed; until evaporation, condensation, and the
had weathered and decomposed the molten rocks so as to form soils;
as to be chemically fit for the decompositions necessary to vegetable
had set in, did it send the flat forth, 'Let there be Life!'?  These
dignity of which in relation to the world's knowledge was demonstrated

Modern scientific thought is called upon to decide between this
be called upon to do the same.
individuals here and there may be influenced, the process must be slow
public mind.
Strip it naked, and you stand face to face with the notion that not
the nobler forms of the horse and lion, not alone the exquisite and
itself--emotion, intellect, will, and all their phenomena--were once
  Surely the mere statement of such a notion
  But the hypothesis would probably go even
  Many who hold it would probably assent to the
poetry, all our science, and all our art--Plato, Shakspeare, Newton,
  We long to learn
  If the Evolution hypothesis be correct, even
separate the primeval mist from the consciousness of to-day.
think that any holder of the Evolution hypothesis would say that I
  I merely strip it of all
notions by which it must stand or fall.

entertained by any sane mind.
why should sanity reject them?  The law of Relativity, of which we
  These
intellectual gibbet, in relation to the ideas concerning matter which
  Spirit and matter have ever been
other as all-vile.
question all depends.
antithesis of spirit and matter presented to our youthful minds, we
wonderful; to consider them, in fact, as two opposite faces of the
  Supposing that in youth we had been impregnated
Young, and taught to look upon matter, not as 'brute matter,' but as
altered circumstances the law of Relativity might have had an outcome
repugnance to the idea of primeval union between spirit and matter
notions now prevalent, the Evolution hypothesis must stand condemned;
taken place.
referred to; but they exalt one of them from its abasement, and repeal
  In substance, if not in
'What God hath joined together, let not man put asunder.

beyond the nebulae scientific thought has never hitherto ventured.
have tried to state that which I considered ought, in fairness, to be
  I neither think this Evolution hypothesis is to be flouted
  It
justified or condemned.
it, and to those who wisely oppose it; and let us tolerate those,

side.
  Steady yourselves, in its
expressed by old Gamaliel when he said: 'If it be of God, ye cannot
' Under the
possess not a core of truth.
is quite compatible with the simultaneous existence of all those
  It does not
universe.
  For, granting
would still remain to baffle and bewilder us.
hypothesis does nothing more than 'transport the conception of life's
'
Those who hold the doctrine of Evolution are by no means ignorant of
assent.
utter absence of any evidence to prove the act illegal, they extend
 Here the observed
  Within the long range of
caprice.
continuity have run side by side.
of their curve in a world of observation and experiment, they prolong
unbroken sequence of development from the nebula to the present time.
You never hear the really philosophical defenders of the doctrine of
  They never say,
for the Builder of the universe to alter His work.
not with the possible, but the actual--not with a world which might
  This they explore with a courage not
quality of a tree, are tested by their fruits.
desire--to know the truth.

unswerving trust, they also know the limits beyond which science
  They best know that questions offer themselves
tendency to solve.
who says there is no God, as with the theist who professes to know the
  'Two things,' said Immanuel Kant, 'fill me with awe: the
' And in
has ceased, and the pause of reflection has set in, the scientific
  Breaking
Power which gives fulness and tone to his existence, but which he can





  There is one God supreme over all gods, diviner than mortals,
  But vain mortals imagine that gods like themselves are begotten,
  So, if oxen or lions had hands and could work in man's fashion,
  Then would horses depict gods like horses, and oxen like oxen,

                         XENOPHANES Of COLOPHON (six centuries B.
),
 1.



  THE BELFAST ADDRESS.

evening, August 19, 1874.


AN impulse inherent in primeval man turned his thoughts and
  The
action to-day.
experience we form physical theories which lie beyond the pale of
natural occurrence resting upon a cause.
the origin of things, our earliest historic (and doubtless, we might
permitted, the same course.
with this difference--that the particular experiences which furnished
nature, but from what lay much closer to them--the observation of
  Their theories accordingly took an anthropomorphic form.
super-sensual beings, which, 'however potent and invisible, were
mankind, and retaining all human passions and appetites,' were handed
 [Footnote: Hume,
]
Tested by observation and reflection, these early notions failed in

differentiating themselves from the crowd, rejecting these
their physical principles.
the understanding, the merchant had been abroad, and rendered the
leisure for travel and speculation secured, while races educated under
had been stimulated and sharpened by mutual contact.
where the commercial aristocracy of ancient Greece mingled with their
developed by free-thinking and courageous men.
be displaced may be gathered from a passage of Euripides quoted by
  'There is nothing in the world; no glory, no prosperity.
gods toss all into confusion; mix everything with its reverse, that
worship and reverence.
of caprice, and the absolute reliance upon law in nature, there grew,
sweep from the field of theory this mob of gods and demons, and to

The problem which had been previously approached from above, was now
sub-sensible.
was necessary to have some notion of its constituent parts--of what
' Abstracting
at length the pregnant doctrine of atoms and molecules, the latest
the last meeting of the British Association.
long hovered about this doctrine before it attained the precision and
Born 460 B.
] a philosopher who may well for a moment arrest our
  'Few great men,' says Lange, a non-materialist, in his
of which I am equally indebted, 'have been so despitefully used by
  In the distorted images sent down to us
but the name of "the laughing philosopher," while figures of
before us.
Democritus--for ample illustrations of which I am indebted to my
 Spedding, the learned editor and biographer of
  It is evident, indeed, that Bacon considered Democritus to be
philosophy 'was noised and celebrated in the schools, amid the din
'  It was not they, but Genseric and Attila and
  'For, at a time
Aristotelian and Platonic philosophy, as being of a lighter and more
more solid sank and almost passed into oblivion.

inherited fortune to the culture of his mind.
everywhere; visited Athens when Socrates and Plato were there, but
  Indeed, the dialectic
Democritus, who held that 'the man who readily contradicts, and uses
' He is said to
much by the manner in which he, being a hewer of wood, tied up his
  Democritus returned
wrote his great work entitled 'Diakosmos,' which he read publicly
  He was honoured by his

The principles enunciated by Democritus reveal his uncompromising
caprices of the gods.

 From nothing comes nothing.


2.
which it follows by necessity.

 The only existing things are the atoms and empty space; all else is

4.
they strike together, and the lateral motions and whirlings which thus

5.
atoms, in number, size, and aggregation.

 The soul consists of fine, smooth, round atoms, like those of fire.
These are the most mobile of all: they interpenetrate the whole body,

The first five propositions are a fair general statement of the atomic
  As regards the sixth, Democritus made his
unknown.
they combine in obedience to mechanical laws; and not only organic
their combination.

organism to another part, and to the conditions of life,' more
attempt to solve.
introduced the notion of love and hate among the atoms, to account for
struck in with the penetrating thought, linked, however, with some
which were suited to their ends (in other words, in harmony with their
no proper habitat, must rapidly disappear.
years ago, the doctrine of the 'survival of the fittest,' which in our
has been raised to such extraordinary significance, had received at
 [Footnote: See 'Lange,' 2nd edit,
 23.

C.
schoolmaster at Samos, is the next dominant figure in the history of
  He mastered the writings of Democritus, heard
through various countries.
bought a garden, and surrounded himself by pupils, in the midst of

beauty, without understanding, partook of animalism.
rated the spirit above the body; the pleasure of the body being that
past.
he never quoted either friend or foe.
to free the world from superstition and the fear of death.
treated with indifference.
  As long
  Life has no
live.
  The idea
  Still
rather he who accepts them.
beings, whose blessedness excluded every thought of care or occupation
  Nature pursues her course in accordance with everlasting
  They haunt:
    The lucid interspace Of world and world
    Nor ever falls the least white star of snow,
    Nor sound of human sorrow mounts to mar

                  Tennyson's 'Lucretius.

indication, probably, of an ethical requirement of his own nature.
cannot read history with open eyes, or study human nature to its
  Man never has been,
the Understanding alone; hence physical science cannot cover all the
  But the history of the efforts made to satisfy
error, in great part, consisting in ascribing fixity to that which is
becoming, as our capacities widen, more abstract and sublime.
great point the mind of Epicurus was at peace.
expected, here or hereafter, any personal profit from his relation to
  And it is assuredly a fact, that loftiness and serenity of
of this kind.
 [Footnote:
] to me once, 'that an Intelligence is at the heart of
' The utterer of these
that it was the need of ethical harmony here, and not the thought of

There are persons, not belonging to the highest intellectual zone, nor
want of depth.
learned phraseology.
rid his style of every trace of haze and turbidity, appeared, on this
  He had, however, a disciple who thought it
reach the clearness of his master, and to whom the Greek philosopher

Born 99 B.
] wrote his great poem, 'On the Nature of Things,' in
of his Greek predecessor.
the school of Epicurus; and although he has no rewards in a future
one, he addresses his friend with the heat of an apostle.
like that of his great forerunner, is the destruction of superstition;
event as a direct monition from the gods, and that everlasting torture
deemed a positive good.
mind, must be dispelled, not by the rays of the sun and glittering
' He refutes
begotten can be recalled to nothing.
are indestructible, and into them all things can be resolved at last.
Bodies are partly atoms; and partly combinations of atoms; but the
 They are strong in solid singleness, and, by
enduring strength.
  We
substratum, all order in the generation and development of things

The mechanical shock of the atoms being, in his view, the
constitution of nature has been in any way determined by intelligent
  The interaction of the atoms throughout infinite time
  Of these, the fit ones
  Not after sage
nor did they bargain what motions they should assume.
eternity they have been driven together, and, after trying motions and
of which this system of things has been evolved.

once, and rid of her haughty lords, is seen to do all things
'
  In his criticism of this work
 Hayman does not appear to be aware of
Lucretius, though erroneous, sometimes rests.

describes a violent storm, and shows that the invisible particles of
  We
coming to our nostrils.
break upon, become moist, and then get dry if spread out in the sun,
water-particles.
water-drop hollows out a stone; the ploughshare is rubbed away in the
disappear at any moment we cannot see.
particles.
foregoing references prove.
respect, is his explanation of the apparent rest of bodies whose atoms
  He employs the image of a flock of sheep with skipping
the green hill, the jumping of the individual lambs being quite

His vaguely grand conception of the atoms falling eternally through

innumerable, which have never been united to form bodies, or which, if
immeasurable intervals of time and space.
the All the same conditions are repeated, so must the phenomena be
  Above us, below us, beside us, therefore, are worlds
of a deflection of the universe by the gods.
attracting new atoms out of limitless space, or dispersing their own
  The reputed death of Lucretius, which forms the basis of
 Tennyson's noble poem, is in strict accordance with his

2.

between the first of them and the last, the human intellect was active
  Pythagoras had founded a school of
  The
  At Athens had appeared
yoke remains to some extent unbroken to the present hour.
period also the School of Alexandria was founded, Euclid wrote his
  Archimedes had propounded
 Astronomy
followed by the historically more celebrated Ptolemy.
been made the basis of scientific medicine; and it is said by Draper
 [Footnote: 'History of the Intellectual
 295.
had already cleared the world of the fantastic images of divinities
  It had shaken itself
alone,' which had vainly sought to transcend experience, and to reach
  Instead of accidental observation, it
to aid the senses; and scientific method was rendered in a great measure

What, then, stopped its victorious advance?  Why was the scientific
two millenniums, before it could regather the elements necessary to
Whewell ascribes this stationary period to four causes--obscurity of
and he gives striking examples of each.
Inductive Sciences,' vol.
]  But these characteristics must have
  Rome, and the

moderation, if not asceticism of life, practically protesting against
  The sufferings of the early Christians,
over the diabolical tortures to which they were subjected, must have
 [Footnote: Described with terrible
']  They scorned the earth, in view of
heavens.
were also the measure of their Science.
celebrated question of Antipodes came to be discussed, the Bible was
  Augustine, who flourished
D.
deny the possible existence of inhabitants at the other side, 'because
'
beings out of the reach of the means of salvation.
Science was not likely to make much progress.
and theological strife between the Church and civil governments, so
investigation.

Middle Ages.
  The seekers after natural
appeal to nature by observation and experiment, and given themselves
  It was
authority led, as it always does in science, to intellectual death.
Natural events, instead of being traced to physical, were referred to
as the spiritualism of the present day, took the place of scientific
  Then came the mysticism of the Middle Ages, Magic,
abstractions, which caused men to look with shame upon their own
blessedness of the Creator.
fusion, according to Lange, of the least mature notions of Aristotle
 Intellectual immobility was the
  As a traveller without a compass in a fog may wander long,
his starting-point, so the schoolmen, having 'tied and untied the same
at the end of centuries in their old position.
]
With regard to the influence wielded by Aristotle in the Middle Ages,
to make one remark.

extraordinary power in one domain, there is a tendency to credit it
  Thus theologians have
the question of revelation--forgetful of the fact that the very
a totally different class of ideas, not to speak of any natural
to deal with theological and historic questions.
from his established greatness as a poet, and indeed from his positive
the painters of Germany, when he published his 'Farbenlehre,' in
  This
charlatan, and attacked him with a corresponding vehemence of

In the domain of Natural History, Goethe had made really considerable
devoted himself wholly to that side of science, he might have reached
  In
remote, in the classification and organisation of facts according to
  These
poet.
direction of natural history, may be almost shorn of endowment as
  Goethe was in this
  He could not formulate distinct mechanical conceptions; he
such reasoning reigns supreme, he became a mere ignis fatuus to those

I have sometimes permitted myself to compare Aristotle with Goethe--to
systematising facts, but to consider him fatally defective on that
ascribed to Goethe.
neglect of facts, but to 'a neglect of the idea appropriate to the
substitution of vague or inapplicable notions, involving only
' This is doubtless true; but
Aristotle, as in Goethe, it was not, I believe, misdirection, but
  As a
worst of attributes in a modern physical investigator--indistinctness
to the delusive notion that he had really mastered his subject, while
  He put
  He
enquiry, by passing from the general to the particular, instead of
  He made of the universe a closed
general principles, to his own satisfaction and to that of the world
  His
  It was natural or
conception regarding it lying at the bottom of his mind.

motion in it would be impossible.
species of animals must exist, and showed on general principles why
  When an eminent contemporary
these abuses of the _à priori_ method, he will be able to make allowance
priori_ truths.
Lange, were grave and numerous.
the beating of the heart, that the left side of the body was colder
an empty space at the back of every man's head.

entirely wanting in those of Aristotle and his followers--a capability
  The Germans
they call a Vorstellung.
nearer to our requirements than Imagination; and, taken with its
  But it is tainted by
  Compare,
the Aristotelian, who refers the ascent of water in a pump to Nature's
the question of atmospheric pressure by the ascent of the Puy de Dôme.
In the one case the terms of the explanation refuse to fall into place
and rise of the barometer being clearly figured beforehand as the

3.

intellect, as forcibly shown by Draper, was active.
intrusion of the Moors into Spain, order, learning, and refinement
  When smitten with disease, the
instructed physician.
Greek philosophers, but not from the Greek poets.
disgust 'from the lewdness of our classical mythology, and denounced
Olympian Jove and the Most High God.
than Whewell the Arab elements in our scientific terms.
examples of what Arabian men of science accomplished, dwelling
notion that rays of light are emitted by the eye.
atmospheric refraction, and showed that we see the sun and the moon
  He explained the enlargement of the sun and
bodies when near the horizon.
decreases in density with increase of elevation, and actually fixed
5 miles.
sets forth the connection between the weight of the atmosphere and its
  He shows that a body will weigh differently in a
plunged bodies rise through heavier media.
of the centre of gravity, and applied it to the investigation of
  He recognised gravity as a.
he fell into the error of assuming it to diminish simply as the
  He knew the relation
distinct ideas of capillary attraction.

approach very closely to our own.
pious prayer of Alhazen, that in the day of judgment the All-Merciful
the race of men to construct a table of specific gravities.
this be historic truth (and I have entire confidence in Dr.
well may he 'deplore the systematic manner in which the literature of
to the Mahommedans.
p.
]
The strain upon the mind during the stationary period towards
was sure to provoke reaction.
ground was dangerous, and a power was at hand competent to crush the
  To elude this power, and still allow
truth' was invented, according to which an opinion might be held
'
  pp.
]  Thus, in the thirteenth
unchangeableness of the individual soul, which had been so distinctly
 Thomas Aquinas, were both denied philosophically, but
  When
vituperation, that 'opposite assertions are equally true,' he simply
subjectively true to the one might be subjectively untrue to the
  The great Sophist never meant to play fast and loose with the
individual, could possibly escape being a lie.
'sophistry,' but the dread of theologic vengeance, that generated this
lengths were allowed to men who were adroit in the use of artifices

Towards the close of the stationary period a word-weariness, if I may

wastes, which led to no issue, but left the intellect in everlasting
  Here and there was heard the voice of one impatiently crying in
unto church, Bible, or blind tradition, must we turn for a knowledge
observation and experiment.
Copernicus on the paths of the heavenly bodies appeared.
crash of Aristotle's closed universe, with the earth at its centre,
watchword among intellectual freemen.
church of Frauenburg in the diocese of Ermeland.
years he had withdrawn himself from the world, and devoted himself to
  He made
overthrow, it was so obviously strong, that they refrained for a time
  In the last year of the life of Copernicus his
days before his death, and then departed in peace.

converts to the new astronomy.
revived the notion of the infinity of worlds; and, combining with it
the fixed stars are suns, scattered numberless through space, and
our earth does to our sun, or our moon to our earth.
expansion of transcendent import; but Bruno came closer than this to
  Struck with the problem of the
came to the conclusion that Nature, in her productions, does not
  Her process is one of unravelling and
  The infinity of forms under which matter appears was not
and virtue it brings these forms forth.
empty capacity which philosophers have pictured her to be, but the
womb.

  He was accused of
Germany.

handed over to the Civil power, with the request that he should be
' This meant that
1600.
afterwards, abjured upon his knees, with his hands upon the holy
  After
power.
planetary motion.
those empirical laws together by the principle of gravitation.


In the seventeenth century Bacon and Descartes, the restorers of
  Differently educated and endowed,
  Bacon held fast to
making collected experiences the basis of all knowledge.
mathematical studies of Descartes gave him a bias towards Deduction;
who 'made the individual man the measure of all things.
therefore I am,' said Descartes.
him; and the full development of this system would have led to an
mere phenomenon of consciousness.
contemporaries, of whom we shall hear more presently, quickly pointed
reference to any other act, as to the act of thinking.
therefore I am, or I love, therefore I am, would be quite as
  Lichtenberg, indeed, showed that the very thing to be
and it is plain that no inference from the postulate could, by any

But Descartes deviated strangely from the idealism implied in his
  He was the first to reduce, in a manner
phenomena to purely mechanical principles.
Descartes was a good churchman; he accordingly rejected the notion of
could not divide an atom; he puts in the place-of the atoms small
organism.
with water for its motive power, which shall illustrate vital actions.
He has made clear to his mind that such a machine would be competent
respiration, and the beating of the heart.
accept impressions from the external sense, to store them up in
appetites and passions, and the external movements of the limbs.
deduces these functions of his machine from the mere arrangements of
from its weights and wheels.
concerned,' he says, 'it is not necessary to conceive any other
life, than the blood and the spirits agitated by the fire which burns
fires existing in inanimate bodies.
with the steam-engine, he would have taken it, instead of a fall of
  He would have shown the perfect analogy
of the coal in the furnace.
in calling the blood which the heart diffuses, 'the oil of the lamp of
the motions of a steam-engine are deduced from the combustion of its
  As the matter stands, however, and considering the
with which Descartes grasped the problem of vital dynamics constitute
 [Footnote: See
' Lay Sermons.

vanished from discussion.
sober-minded and thoughtful men, though neither the church nor the
  Once, in the year
  But retractation by compulsion
seventeenth century, when it was revived by a contemporary and friend
Gassendi.
it will be well to say a few words on the effect, as regards science,

'Were men,' says Hume, 'led into the apprehension of invisible
never possibly entertain any conception but of one single Being, who
its parts to one regular system.
heathen, who sees a god behind every natural event, thus peopling the
shows the impossibility of any compromise between such notions and
law and causality.
penetration, 'when the great thought of one God, acting as a unit upon
with the law of cause and effect is not only thinkable, but it is a
  For when I see ten thousand
one motive power, then I know that I have before me a mechanism, the

of that machine, and the various motions of its parts.
being, therefore, this conception renders scientific action free.
other words, were a capricious God at the circumference of every wheel
incalculable by the methods of science.
parts being rigidly determined by their connections and relations, and
this last prime mover may elude me, I am still able to comprehend the
  We have here a conception of the
some minds, but perfectly intolerable to others.
lived and worked happily under the influence of this conception;
accepting it is manifest in Carlyle.
universe was the Strasburg clock with an outside Artificer.
on the other hand, sang:
    'Ihm ziemt's die Welt im Innern zu bewegen,
'
See also Carlyle, 'Past and Present,' chap.
]
The analytic and synthetic tendencies of the human mind are traceable
one side, sometimes on the other.
open to the elevating impressions produced by nature as a whole, whose
synthetic side; while the analytic harmonises best with the more
understanding.
while a detached Creator, working more or less after the manner of
  Gassendi, as sketched by Lange,
  Having formally acknowledged God
known laws of mechanics to the atoms, and deduced from them all vital
  He defended Epicurus, and dwelt upon his purity, both of
  True he was a heathen, but so was Aristotle.
Epicurus assailed superstition and religion, and rightly, because he
  He thought that the gods neither
their completeness: here we see, says Gassendi, the reverence of the
  The errors of Epicurus shall
  Gassendi then
all that therein is, of atoms and molecules.
and water, plants and animals, produced in the first place a definite
  Then began
which will continue in future.
in matter.
different from the material worked upon; but in nature the agent works

church or the world, contrives to outstrip Mr.
  The same cast
him also to detach the soul from the body, though to the body he
unnecessary.
of the material brain.
immortal reason sits apart, and cannot be touched by the disease.
errors of madness are those of the instrument, not of the performer.

probably, with the deeper mental structure of the two men, that the
expressed by Professor Clerk Maxwell, at the close of the very able
  According to both
materials, which, formed once for all by the Eternal, produce by their
  There

  In his
finds the basis of an induction, which enables him to scale
logical step from the atoms to their Maker.

Maxwell's logic; but it is impossible not to feel the ethic glow with
  There is, moreover, a very noble strain
Natural causes, as we know, are at work, which tend to modify, if they
earth and the whole solar system.
catastrophes have occurred and may yet occur in the heavens, though
ruins, the molecules out of which these systems are built--the
unworn.

Descartes, Hobbes, Locke, Newton, Boyle, and their successors, until
it an entirely new significance.
the theory, but it still stands firm.
William Thomson have sought to determine the sizes of the atoms, or
discourses of Williamson and Maxwell delivered in Bradford in 1873
scientific minds.
fundamental conception, a theory of the material universe is capable

5.

instruments, as it may be called, assumed immense importance in the
developed, from his own point of view, and with consummate sagacity, a
  The Bishop still influences many superior minds; and it
  He draws the
instruments.
possibly because the term was so hackneyed in his day, as it had been
  But he speaks of 'living powers,'
the same sense as we should employ the term soul.
fact that limbs may be removed, and mortal diseases assail the body,
  He
but not destroyed.
existence out of our bodies as in them; that we may animate a
tendency to dissolve our real selves, or 'deprive us of living
dissolution of any foreign matter which we are capable of receiving
'
no more a part of ourselves than any other matter around us.
of this he calls attention to the use of glasses, which 'prepare
  The eye
instrument of the true self, and also as foreign to the true self, as
  'And if we see with our eyes only in the same manner as
all our senses.

and it certainly would be interesting, if not profitable, to us all,
the Bishop.
the bearings of an important question, I will here permit a disciple
allow the Bishop to retaliate, with the view of rolling back, if he

The argument might proceed in this fashion:
'Subjected to the test of mental presentation (Vorstellung), your
not an insuperable, difficulty.
"percipient or perceiving powers," and "ourselves;" but can you form a
it is supposed to act?  Test yourself honestly, and see whether you

must it not possess a form?  If so, what form?  Have you ever for a
two parts; is the true self in both of them or in one?  Thomas Aquinas
associated with one of the two parts, to prove that the other is
  Is consciousness, then, a necessary element of the
deprived of consciousness?  If not, then on what grounds do you deny
singular that from the beginning to the end of your admirable book
mention the brain or nervous system.
body, and show that its parts may be removed without prejudice to the
  What if you begin at the other end, and remove,
two parts; but both are now in the same predicament, and neither can
  Or, instead
of its bony covering be removed, and let a rhythmic series of
substance.
action" vanish; at every relaxation of pressure they are restored.
Where, during the intervals of pressure, is the perceiving power?  I
through me: I felt nothing, but was simply blotted out of conscious
  Where was my true self during that
longer in the same state; and indeed in cases of ordinary concussion
in consciousness.
insensibility?  You may say that I beg the question when I assume the
time, and has simply forgotten what had occurred to him.
this, I can only say that no one need shrink from the worst tortures
  I
the matter.
which he converses with the world; our bodies possess a nervous
external things.
demagnetise his needle; by this means you certainly sever his
instruments, their destruction does not touch the man who uses them.
The operator survives, and he knows that he survives.
I would ask, in the human system that answers to this conscious
as to produce insensibility, or when it is destroyed altogether?
'Another consideration, which you may regard as slight, presses upon
  The brain may change from health to disease, and
debauchee or a murderer.
as you know, threatenings of lewdness introduced into his brain by his
risk of yielding to these base promptings he slew himself.
the hand of Lucretius have been thus turned against himself if the
this distempered way without the intervention of the immortal reason?
regulation to render it reasonably self-acting, and there is no
  If it cannot, then the
broken instrument, must have the credit of committing every imaginable

I think, if you will allow me to say so, that the gravest consequences
  To regard the
its mystery, to the perfect correlation of its condition and our
it produces the very swoon to which you refer, and that in relation to
transcendental value and significance--to forget all this does, I
possibly, in some cases, initiate and foster that very disease, and
organ would have avoided.

  He
point of this kind.
himself by that honest contemplation of the facts which was habitual
reasonings their due weight, I can suppose the Bishop to proceed thus:
have so kindly spoken, I did not profess to prove anything absolutely,
smallness of our knowledge, or rather the depth of our ignorance, as
  My object was to show my
beneficence of Nature and the Ruler thereof, while they had nothing
they were in no better condition than we were, and that, for every
found upon theirs.
line of argument.
separation of insensate atoms deduce all terrestrial things, including
  Let me tell you in the first
  I admit that you can
diamond, amethyst, and snow-star are truly wonderful structures which
  I will go farther and acknowledge that even a tree
  Nay, if you can show me an
put together by the suitable play of molecular force.

  Your atoms
intelligence.
problem.
dead carbon atoms, your dead nitrogen atoms, your dead phosphorus
brain is formed.
them running together and forming all imaginable combinations.
as a purely mechanical process, is seeable by the mind.
see, or dream, or in any way imagine, how out of that mechanical act,
emotion are to rise?  Are you likely to extract Homer out of the
billiard-balls?  I am not all bereft of this Vorstellungs-Kraft of
as regards scientific knowledge.
until it reaches the olfactory nerve; I can follow the waves of sound
otoliths and Corti's fibres in motion; I can also visualise the waves
  Nay more, I am
periphery, and to see in idea the very molecules of the brain thrown
  My insight is not baffled by these physical processes.
What baffles and bewilders me is the notion that from those physical
and emotion can be derived.
consciousness from the clash of atoms is not more incongruous than the
  But I beg to
  For such incongruity as the flash possesses is that
  The 'flash' is an affair of
  It
  You are the cause of the
  I need
feel; and that to get rid of this monstrous deduction of life from
perfect mirrors of the universe, and out of the summation and
intellectual, and emotional--to arise.

great as mine.
demand for logical continuity between molecular processes and the
  This is a rock on which Materialism must
life.
indulge in ill-temper in the discussion of these great topics, where
  But there are
sides, who are ever ready to mingle anger and vituperation with such
  There are, for example, writers of note and influence at
personal sin" of a great logician to be the cause of his unbelief in a
 [Footnote: This is the aspect under which the late
John Stuart Mill.
in the other world, in the company of the 'unbeliever,' as in that of
  In Dr.
and vigorous nature, soured and perverted by a poisonous creed.
there are others who hold that we, who cherish our noble Bible,
by inheritance into us, must necessarily be hypocritical and
  Let us disavow and discountenance such people, cherishing
will be preserved for the benefit of humanity, while all that is bad
'
I hold the Bishop's reasoning to be unanswerable, and his liberality

It is worth remarking that in one respect the Bishop was a product of
  Long previous to his day the nature of the soul had been so
of the Italian Universities wished to know the leanings of a new
  About
extended.
that many of their best arguments applied equally to brutes and men.
The Bishop's arguments were of this character.
it, took the consequence, and boldly embraced the whole animal world

6.

Testament, describing it as confirmed by the natural and civil history
earth, and from the late inventions of arts and sciences.
mark progress; and they must seem somewhat hoary to the Bishop's
  It is hardly necessary to inform you that since
whole science of geology, with its astounding revelations regarding
  The rigidity of
gradually tolerant of the idea that not for six thousand, nor for
untold millions of years, this earth has been the theatre of life and
  The riddle of the rocks has been read by the geologist and
over the sea-bottoms of today.
are, as you know, stamped the characters, plainer and surer than those
of past time, compared with which the periods which satisfied Bishop

The lode of discovery once struck, those petrified forms in which life
classification.
according to the degree of similarity subsisting between them.
confusion was avoided, each object being found in the pigeon-hole
physiological character.
none but the simplest forms of life lie lowest down; that, as we climb
 The
steps--some small, some great.
 Huxley, 'a
of Ammonite, none of which passes beyond the particular zone of
' In
Have these forms, showing, though in broken stages, and with many
no continuous law of growth or variation? Had our education been
influences which, however ennobling in another domain, have always
domain of physics, the scientific mind never could have swerved from
anthropomorphism which regarded each successive stratum as a kind of
relation to the old.

naturalists invoked a special creative act to account for the
  Doubtless numbers of them
all--that, in point of fact, it was an attempt, by the introduction of
  But, having nothing to
peace.
simmered round the question.
has been brought into notice by Professor Huxley as one who 'had a
'  The late Sir Benjamin
the fact that, as early as 1794, Charles Darwin's grandfather was
 [Footnote: Zoonomia,' vol.

500-510.
who, through the vigorous exposition of his views by the author of the
with the idea of evolution, endeavoured to show the development of
  In 1813 Dr.
Wells, the founder of our present theory of Dew, read before the Royal
 Darwin, 'he
the first recognition that has been indicated.
skill with which Wells pursued his work, and the obvious independence
gave me the liveliest pleasure to alight upon this additional
  Professor Grant, Mr.
von Buch, the author of the 'Vestiges,' D'Halloy, and others, by the
the question had been fermenting long prior to the year 1858, when Mr.
Darwin and Mr.
closely concurrent views before the Linnean Society.
1855 Mr.

 i.
 465) expressed 'the belief that life under all its forms has
what are called natural causes.
time.

edition of the 'Origin of Species.
the birth.
thirty-three years.
Gravitation before his mind; for twenty years also he dwelt upon his
the object of his private thought, had he not found Leibnitz upon his
  Darwin for two-and-twenty years pondered the problem of the
he not found Wallace upon his track.

degree.
labours was the consequence.
and probably not one in every score of those who then attacked it, had
if they had.
were in those days some really eminent scientific men, entirely raised
conclusion that science had to offer, provided it was duly backed by
 Darwin's views.
the work needed an expounder, and it found one in Mr.
  I know
early articles of his on the origin of species.
discussion through the really significant points of the subject,
reflections, often summing up in a single pithy sentence an argument
  But there is
however luminous, can convey; and that is the impression of the vast
production.

It is conceded on all hands that what are called varieties' are
  The rule is probably without exception.
chick, or child, is in all respects and particulars the counterpart of
incipient.
carried; but the great mass of them held that never, by any amount of
offspring of the same progenitor so far deviate from each other as to
  The function of the experimental
results; and this was the method of Darwin.
only towards experimental demonstration has been taken.
now begun might, a couple of centuries hence, furnish data of
future.
manner of doubt, be done in the way of producing variation.
associated himself with pigeon-fanciers--bought, begged, kept, and
  Though derived from a
of them might be chosen which, if shown to an ornithologist, and he
as well-defined species.
pigeon-fancier, as it does the cattle-breeder, is the selection of
variety by inheritance.
appearance which he wishes to exaggerate, he selects it as it
until an astonishing amount of divergence from the parent type is
  The breeder in this case does not produce the elements of
  He simply observes them, and by selection adds them
  'No man,' says
 Darwin, 'would ever try to make a fantail till he saw a pigeon
pouter until he saw a pigeon with a crop of unusual size.
gives the hint, man acts upon it, and by the law of inheritance

Having thus satisfied himself by indubitable facts that the
treatment applies to plants).
from variation under domestication to variation under nature.
we have dealt with the adding together of small changes by the
  Can Nature thus select?  Mr.
answer is, 'Assuredly she can.
is far in excess of the number that can be supported; hence at some

copy of the other in regard to strength, skill, and agility, external
  But this is not the case.
fact of variety offering itself to nature, as in the former instance
competent to cope with surrounding conditions will infallibly give way
  To use a familiar proverb, the
  But the triumphant fraction again breeds to
maintenance, but transmitting them in different degrees.
for food again supervenes, and those to whom the favourable quality

It is easy to see that we have here the addition of increments
in the case of domestication; for not only are unfavourable specimens
  This is what Mr.
Darwin calls 'Natural Selection,' which acts by the preservation and
preserved being.
vast store of facts that he and others have collected.
without shutting our eyes through fear or prejudice, fail to see that
can we fail to discern what vast modifications may be produced by
  Each individual
quantity indefinitely small); but definite and great changes may
quantities, through practically infinite time.

after human fashion, it certainly is not because he is unacquainted
supernatural Artificer has been founded.
the most startling facts of this description.
observation which he cites from Dr.
aperture serving as a spout, is formed in an orchid.
flower: in eager search of material for their combs, they push each
involuntary bath by the spout.
viscid stigma of the flower and obtain glue; then against the pollen

flower a second time, and is pushed by its comrades into the bucket,
necessarily comes first into contact with the viscid stigma,' which
  Or
order to gnaw the labellum; in doing this they inevitably touch a
  This, when touched, transmits a
ruptured, setting free a spring, by which the pollen-mass is shot
extremity to the back of the bee.
is spread abroad.

teleologist that rejects teleology, seeking to refer these wonders to
  They illustrate, according to him, the method of
  The beauty of
  Those that distinguish
leaves are most readily seen, most frequently visited by insects, most

beasts, which feed upon them, spread their manured seeds abroad, thus
the struggle for existence.

 Darwin investigates
  His method of dealing with
  He falls back from the more perfectly to the
bee, which uses its own cocoon as a comb, and to classes of bees of
gradually made from the lowest to the highest.
the most important point in the economy of bees.
pounds of dry sugar are said to be needed for the secretion of a
  The quantities of nectar necessary for the wax
which results in the saving of wax is a direct profit to the insect's
  The time that would otherwise be devoted to the making of wax,
  Mr.
Darwin passes from the humble bee with its rude cells, through the
astonishing architecture.
distances apart upon the wax, sweep and excavate equal spheres round
  The spheres intersect, and the planes of
  Hexagonal cells are thus
  This mode of treating such questions is, as I have said,
  The expositor habitually retires from the more
with him through stages of perfecting--adds increment to increment of
reluctance to admit that the exquisite climax of the whole could be a

Mr.
with his own thought, he must have known, better than his critics, the
  This of course would
instead of the establishment of a truth which he means to be
  But he takes no pains to disguise the weakness he has
light.
by himself and others, so as to leave the final impression upon the
are not fatal.
free to be influenced by the vast positive mass of evidence he is able
  This largeness of knowledge, and readiness of
 Darwin the most terrible of antagonists.
Accomplished naturalists have levelled heavy and sustained criticisms
but with the express intention of exposing its weak points only.
does not irritate him.
thoroughness which even Bishop Butler might be proud to imitate,
proper relations, and usually giving it a significance which, as long
  This is done without a
  He moves over the subject with the passionless
without a counterpart in the logical pulverisation of the objector.
But though in handling this mighty theme all passion has been stilled,
new truth, which often colours and warms the pages of Mr.

His success has been great; and this implies not only the solidity of
revelation.
anything else.
combated to the last the theory of natural selection.
times I had the pleasure of meeting him in the United States was at
 Winthrop's beautiful residence at Brookline, near Boston.
from luncheon, we all halted as if by common consent, in front of a
table.
the scene outside seemed, in my case, to interpenetrate without
  Earnestly, almost sadly, Agassiz
was not prepared to see this theory received as it has been by the
  Its success is greater than I could have
'
7.

  The theory of the
  Another, of still wider grasp
Energy, the ultimate philosophical issues of which are as yet but
extent not hitherto recognised, exacting from every antecedent its
antecedent, and bringing vital as well as physical phenomena under the
understanding has yet pierced, asserts itself everywhere in nature.
Long in advance of all definite experiment upon the subject, the
subsequent experience justified the affirmation.
attribute of indestructibility to energy, applying it in the first
nature.
 Berthold has shown that Leibnitz had sound views
]  The
sources, was proved incompetent to generate anew either matter or
  Its matter is for the most part transmuted gas; its force
  The animal world was proved to be equally
of its food.
be the transferred activity of its molecules.
to be stores of mechanical energy, potential until unlocked by the
  The speed at
Helmholtz, and found to be, not, as had been previously supposed,
sound--less even than that of an eagle.

comparative anatomist and physiologist, revealing the structure of
series, from the lowest zoophyte up to man.
been made the object of profound and continued study, the wonderful
exercises over the whole organism, physical and mental, being
  Thought could not be kept back from a
  Besides the physical life dealt
 Darwin, there is a psychical life presenting similar
  How are the different
of growth of that mysterious power which on our planet culminates in
forcibly upon the attention of the general public, had not only
of them before the 'Origin of Species' appeared.

in his hands, Mr.
upon this basis a system of psychology; and two years ago a second and
  Those who have
remember that when two spherules of olive-oil suspended in a mixture
together, they do not immediately unite.
appears to be formed around the drops, the rupture of which is

as the coalescence of such drops of oil.
fuse themselves thus together.
higher, from these to others a shade higher still, and on through an
 Spencer conducts his argument.
two obvious factors to be here taken into account--the creature and
organism and its environment.
 Spencer's fundamental principle is,
  The
the requirements of the environment.
continuous adjustment of internal relations to external relations.

the entire body; then, through impressions from without and their
responsive to stimuli than others.
of all of them being that simple tactual sense which the sage
  The
disturbance of the chemical processes in the animal organism, similar
  By degrees the action
the surrounding tissue.
  At first it is merely
close at hand.
is, by the contact of the closely adjacent opaque body, sight in this
' The adjustment
pigment-granules supervenes.
operation of infinite adjustments, at length reaches the perfection
  So of the other senses; they
sensitive all over.

organism and its environment gradually extend in space, a
conduct being the result.

intervals.
adjustments also increase in speciality and complexity, passing
into the domain of reason.
 Spencer's remarks
intelligence.
senses, into which they must be translated to be of service to the
  Hence its importance.
of birds, and its tactual power is also greatest.
gets knowledge, unattainable by birds which cannot employ their feet
  The elephant is the most sagacious of quadrupeds--its
experiences, which it owes to its wonderfully adaptable trunk, being
  Feline animals, for a similar cause, are
made in the case of the horse, by the possession of sensitive
  In the Primates the evolution of intellect and the
  In the most
greatly augmented, new avenues of knowledge being thus opened to the
  Alan crowns the edifice here, not only in virtue of his own
experience, by the invention of instruments of precision, which serve
  The reciprocal action
intellectual emotion to which I have referred in connection with Mr.
Darwin, is not absent in Mr.
  His illustrations possess at
occasions it is to be inferred, that the ganglia of this Apostle of

It is a fact of supreme importance that actions, the performance of
habit, be rendered automatic.
letters by a child, and the subsequent facility of reading in a man,
without effort, fused to a single perception.
billiard-player, whose muscles of hand and eye, when he reaches the
  Instance the
arrangements, auditory, tactual, and muscular, into a process of
  Combining such facts with the doctrine of
  A chick,
picks up food, thus snowing that it possesses a power of directing its
  How did the chick learn this very complex
individually taught; its personal experience is nit; but it has the
  In its inherited organisation are
  So also as regards
  The distance at
build their cells is 'organically remembered.
him the physical texture of his ancestry, as well as the inherited
  The defects of intelligence during
experience, than to the fact that in early life the cerebral
  The period necessary for completion
  As a round shot
lower race, in childhood, may outstrip the higher.
eventually overtakes the lower, and surpasses it in range.
individuals, we do not always find the precocity of youth prolonged to
strikingly contrasted with the intellectual energy of after years.
Newton, when a boy, was weakly, and he showed no particular aptitude
afterwards astonished his teachers by his power of dealing with
  During his quiet youth his brain was slowly
subsequently displayed.

superscription of the external world are stamped as states of
on the number of the blows.
environment invariably together, they are stamped to the same depth or
  And here we come to
  Seeing that he could in no way rid
be necessary 'forms of intuition,' the moulds and shapes into which
objective existence.
 Spencer
this question.
experienced by all organisms at all instants of their waking
will be established answering internal relations, that are absolutely
  Such relations we have in those of Space and
  As the substratum of all other relations of the Non-Ego, they
other relations in the Ego.
repeated elements of thought, they must become the automatic elements
of--the "forms of intuition.

of Inseparable Association,' Mr.
invoking, instead of the experiences of the individual, the registered
  His overthrow of the restriction of
  That restriction
each individual; it ignores the different degrees of this power
race.
experience, a dog or a cat ought to be as capable of education as man.
These predetermined internal relations are independent of the
  The human brain is the 'organised
evolution of life, or rather during the evolution of that series of
  The
been successively bequeathed, principal and interest, and have slowly
the infant.
thirty cubic inches more of brain than the Papuan.
that faculties, as of music, which scarcely exist in some inferior
  Thus it happens that out
speaking a language containing only nouns and verbs, arise at length
'
8.

which lie beyond experience are derived by a process of abstraction
  It is instructive to note from this point of view
  The idea of the
attraction of iron by a magnet, and of light bodies by rubbed amber.
The polarity of magnetism and electricity also appealed to the senses.
It thus became the substratum of the conception that atoms and
of which definite forms of crystalline architecture are produced.
molecular force becomes structural.
 on Matter and
 III.
boldness of thought to extend its play into organic nature, and to
animals are built up.
conceptions which are wholly ultra-experiential.
of antiquity had any notion of this play of molecular polar force, but

through empty space.
more rapidly than the smaller ones, which they therefore could
  Epicurus, holding that
atoms the same velocity; but he seems to have overlooked the
combine.
altogether, and causing the atoms to move together by a kind of

Was the instinct utterly at fault which caused Lucretius thus to
progenitors, Mr.
he does not say, so far as I remember, how he supposes this form to
  He quotes with satisfaction the words of a
was just as noble a conception of the Deity to believe He created a
forms, as to believe He required a fresh act of creation to supply the
' What Mr.
this view of the introduction of life, I do not know.
anthropomorphism, which it seemed his object to set aside, is as
creation of a multitude.
 Two
  Either let us open our doors
radically change our notions of Matter.
pictured by Democritus, and as defined for generations in our
cannot be formed by the mind.
Bishop Butler suffices, in my opinion, to crush all such materialism
  Those, however, who framed these definitions of matter were
  They were not biologists, but mathematicians,
as could be expressed in their formulae.
science, not the science of life.
never dealt; and, denuded by their imperfect definitions, 'the gentle
  Let us
  Divorced
shows them to be indissolubly joined.
cup we drink, illustrates the mysterious control of Mind by Matter.

more to what we call the purely physical condition.
to those organisms which I have compared to drops of oil suspended in
  We reach the protogenes of Haeckel,
only by its finely granular character.
magnet, and find two poles in each of its fragments.
process of breaking; but, however small the parts, each carries with
  And when we can
molecules.
life?  Is there not a temptation to close to some extent with
spontaneously of herself without the meddling of the gods?  or with
which philosophers have pictured her to be, but the universal mother
as I do, in the continuity of nature, I cannot stop abruptly where our
  Here the vision of the mind
  By a necessity
experimental evidence, [Footnote: This mode of procedure was not
]  and discern in that Matter which we, in our
reverence for its Creator, have hitherto covered with opprobrium, the

If you ask me whether there exists the least evidence to prove that
antecedent life, my reply is that evidence considered perfectly
pondered this question to follow a very common example, and accept
close with the evidence referred to.
science a desire stronger than the wish to have his beliefs upheld;
  And this stronger wish causes
that it is vitiated by error.
this question, believing the evidence offered in favour of
  They
vast array of substances, which were some time ago regarded as the
  They are intimately acquainted with the
crystallisation.
potency, under the proper conditions, to produce organisms.
reply to your question, they will frankly admit their inability to
developed, save from demonstrable antecedent life.
indicated, they draw the line from the highest organisms through lower
the intellect, beyond the range of the senses, that leads them to the
 [Footnote: Bruno was a
']
The 'materialism' here professed may be vastly different from what you
 'The
 S.
battleground of metaphysics.

]  Mr.
of sensation.
our own intuitions.
his understanding proved himself to be a mere link in that chain of
the chain by making nature, and all that it inherits, an apparition of
 [Footnote: 'Bestimmung des Menschen.
means easy to combat such notions.
that there is not the least doubt about it, the obvious reply is, that
  And
would be that I am equally transgressing the limits of fact; for what
nerves of my hand have undergone a change.

be urged, mere variations of our own condition, beyond which, even to
  That anything answering
inference, to which all validity would be denied by an idealist like
  Mr.

to the existence of an external world.
uneducated, who think that the world really is what consciousness
  Our states of consciousness are mere symbols of
their succession, but the real nature of which we can never know.
[Footnote: In a paper, at once popular and profound, entitled 'Recent
by Helmholtz, published by Longmans, this symbolism of our states of
  The impressions of sense are the
  In this paper Helmholtz contends
and he evidently doubts the power of the chick to pick up grains of
  On this point, he says, further
  Such experiments have been since made by Mr.
Spalding, aided, I believe, in some of his observations by the
conclusively that the chick does not need a single moment's tuition to

pre-established harmony; and I am not aware of his views as to the
]  In fact, the whole
inscrutable to the intellect of man.
days of Job can man by searching find this Power out.
fundamentally, then, it is by the operation of an insoluble mystery
unfolded, from their prepotent elements in the immeasurable past.

experimental demonstration (for the subject is hardly accessible to
thought.
cogency.
propriety be so called) derived, as were the theories referred to at
the observation of men--a theory which converts the Power whose
after the human model, and acting by broken efforts as man is seen to
  On the other side we have the conception that all we see around
as those of the human mind--have their unsearchable roots in a
which is offered to the investigation of man.
only knowable in part.
system, and correlate with it the parallel phenomena of sensation and
  We see with undoubting certainty that they go hand in hand.
But we try to soar in a vacuum the moment we seek to comprehend the
  An Archimedean fulcrum is here required
problem--to borrow a comparison from an illustrious friend of mine--is
  All
this fundamental truth.

tissue at first vaguely sensitive all over' is spoken of, and when
of an organism by its environment,' the same parallelism, without
  Man the object is
  There is no
rupture, from the one to the other.


The doctrine of Evolution derives man, in his totality, from the

 Spencer
result of the play between organism and environment through cosmic
  Never, surely, did prescription plead so irresistible
  But then it comes to pass that, over and above his
prescriptive rights are quite as strong as those of the understanding
  It is a result, for example, of the play of organism and
smell of henbane differs' from the perfume of a rose.
consciousness (for which, by the way, no adequate reason has ever been
can boast an equally ancient origin.
 Spencer at one place refers
when it first occurs, is antecedent to all relative experience
as valid, as that of the understanding itself.
things woven into the texture of man as the feeling of Awe, Reverence,
of the beautiful, physical, and moral, in Nature, Poetry, and Art.
There is also that deep-set feeling, which, since the earliest dawn of
itself in the Religious of the world.
these religions into the high-and-dry light of the intellect, may
fail to touch the immovable basis of the religious sentiment in the
  To yield this sentiment reasonable satisfaction is the
  And grotesque in relation to
are--dangerous, nay, destructive, to the dearest privileges of freemen
again--it will be wise to recognise them as the forms of a force,
knowledge, over which it holds no command, but capable of adding, in
man.

as intelligence, and it equally demands its range of play.
teacher of humanity will recognise the necessity of meeting this
absurdities of form.
attempt made in the past, and now repeated, to found upon this
sway over his intellect.

it more and more.
breaking in upon the minds of the youth of Ireland, and strengthening
spiritual tyranny which may threaten this island, than the laws of
  We fought and won our battle even
our broken foe?
The impregnable position of science may be described in a few words.
We claim, and we shall wrest from theology, the entire domain of
  All schemes and systems which thus infringe upon
control, and relinquish all thought of controlling it.
otherwise proved always disastrous in the past, and it is simply
  Every system which would escape the fate of an
plastic to the extent that the growth of knowledge demands.
'this truth has been thoroughly taken in, rigidity will be relaxed,
and elements now rejected will be assimilated.
life is the essential point; and as long as dogmatism, fanaticism, and
raise life to a higher level.

ultra-scientific source.
made under the stimulus of a non-scientific ideal.
among the ancients, and it has been so amongst ourselves.
Joule, and Colding, whose names are associated with the greatest of
  With his usual insight,
correct and intelligible that helps man most, or leads most quickly to
  As the sliding body upon the
the inclined plane, so, through the swing of the ideal, we often
understanding.
to science; but he means the enthusiasm of weak heads.
strong and resolute enthusiasm in which science finds an ally; and it
intellectual insight, that the lessening productiveness of men of
  Mr.
to detach intellectual achievement from moral force.
erred; for without moral force to whip it into action, the achievement

It has been said by its opponents that science divorces itself from
of knowledge.
leaders--of its Helmholtz, its Huxley, and its Du Bois-Reymond--would
  Where among
literary style?  Science desires not isolation, but freely combines

force, it has built at least one great wing of the many-mansioned home
  And if rough walls and protruding
it is only by wise combination of the parts required, with those
  There
what remains to be done.
feel by ignition, has in it nothing incompatible with the physics of
to-day.
strong, whose prophet-voice some thirty years ago, far more than any
in its most gifted minds--one fit to stand beside Socrates or the
dared--fit, as he once said of Fichte, Ito have been the teacher of
Academe.
friend Goethe did not possess, and which even total lack of exercise
he, in the vigour of his years, did not open his mind and sympathies
mankind.
of the Heart and of the Understanding--he might have done much towards
coming times to dwell together, in unity of spirit and in the bond of

*****
And now the end is come.
knowledge, what has been here said might have been better said, while
  But

you, I thought you ought to know the environment which, with or
which some adjustment on your part may be necessary.
Hamlet's, however, teaches us how the troubles of common life may be
intellectual peace at the price of intellectual death.
not without refuges of this description; nor is it wanting in persons
 The
and they to whom repose is sweeter than the truth.
you to refuse the offered shelter, and to scorn the base repose--to
the breezy leap of the torrent before the foetid stillness of the
  In the course of this Address I have touched on debatable
this partly with the view of telling you that, as regards these
  It is not to
Spencer, may be wrong.
indeed certain that these views will undergo modification.
point is, that, whether right or wrong, we claim the right to discuss
  For science, however, no exclusive claim is here made; you are
  The inexorable advance of man's
of his moral and emotional nature, which the understanding can never
  The world embraces not only a
Kant, but a Beethoven--not only a Darwin, but a Carlyle.
of these, but in all, is human nature whole.
supplementary--not mutually exclusive, but reconcilable.

of a pilgrim for his distant home, will still turn to the Mystery from
thought and faith; so long as this is done, not only without
recognition that ultimate fixity of conception is here unattainable,
in accordance with its own needs--then, casting aside all the
noblest exercise of what, in contrast with the knowing faculties, may
  Here, however, I touch a
by the loftiest minds, when you and I, like streaks of morning cloud,





  APOLOGY FOR THE BELFAST ADDRESS.


THE world has been frequently informed of late that I have raised up
exceptions, the deliverances of the Press, and more particularly of
too true.
Diogenes, transmitted to us by Plutarch, that 'he who would be saved
possesses both.
mine.

appeals, menaces, and judgments--covering not only the world that now
how trivially men seem to be influenced by what they call their
province of religion to eradicate or subdue.
argument, from the tenderest and holiest sympathy on the part of those
deliberate unfairness, to a spirit of bitterness, which desires with a
  Now, were religion the
professing a common creed, while, if human nature be the really potent
men.
that the common religion, professed and defended by these different
own tempers, lofty or low, courteous or vulgar, mild or ferocious, as
  Pure abuse, however, as serving no good end, I have,
keep, not only hatred, malice, and uncharitableness, but even every
demands not only good-temper, but largeness, clearness, and
solutions.

the Address as subsequently published by Messrs.
retracted opinions uttered at Belfast.
specially strong upon this point.
dissent which my 'dazzling fallacies' have evoked, I am now trying to
  This he will by no means tolerate.
seek to hide from the eyes of mankind one foul blot, one ghastly
  Professor Tyndall has himself told us how and where this
  It was written among the glaciers and
  It was no hasty, hurried, crude

My critic intends to be severe: he is simply just.
to which he refers I worked with deliberation, endeavouring even to
own Church for the sanctification of the soul.
my ponderings to realise not only the lawful, but the expedient; and
word on which I could not take my stand, either in this or in any

Still my time was so brief, the difficulties arising from my isolated
that, in a literary point of view, I halted, not only behind the
  Hence, after the delivery of the
but to improve it verbally, and above all to remove any word which
'
In connection with the charge of Atheism my critic refers to the
there say, 'are proved by their writings to have their hours of
conviction; and men like myself share, in their own way, these
  Were the religious moods of many of my
claims of the doctrine of "Material Atheism" upon my allegiance might
  Probably they would be very strong.
noticed during years of self-observation that it is not in hours of
that in the presence of stronger and healthier thought it ever
which we dwell, and of which we form a part.

exclaims, 'This is a most remarkable passage.
seasoning polemics with strong words, we assert that this Apology only
the dread imputation against which be struggles.

  But
objective fact.
from the human heart.
is life to the religious.
beyond the assaults of logic.
projected in external forms--I use the word in its widest sense--and
more, as the world become more enlightened, the stress of scientific
  We must be careful of projecting into external nature that
  My critic commits this mistake: he feels,
experiences the most exquisite pleasures of 'the muscular sense' in
  His feelings are as real, as if his imagination of
  His picture of my 'struggles' is,
  I do not struggle.
charge of Atheism; nor should I even disavow it, in reference to any
frame.
therefore, even more unsubstantial than my 'streaks of morning

*****
These minor and more purely personal matters at an end, the weightier
the domain of science, and making an unjustifiable raid into the
  This I fail to see.
my accusers will consent to reason with me.
scientific man to speculate on the antecedents of the solar system?
when they prolonged the intellectual vision beyond the boundary of
as probable, is it not permitted to a scientific man to follow up, in
nebulae; to picture the successive detachment of planets and moons,
with its orbital revolution and axial rotation, as one small issue of
theologian deny my right to entertain and express this theoretic view?
so--when that archenemy of science which now vaunts its tolerance
any opinion of the kind.
strangely slumbering, is for ever past.

hindrance, the whole distance which separates the nebulae from the
  But only a few years ago this now conceded ground
  I could by no means regard this as
thought it not only my right but my duty to state that, as regards the
regard to the inorganic.
title-deed which gave any man, or any class of men, the right to open
close the other against him.
and in the long run most conducive to permanent peace, to indicate,
which she will assuredly make good her claim.

Presidential chair, expressed a totally different view of the Cause of
  In doing so he transgressed the
outcry against him.
  And looking at what
inadequate and foolish notions concerning this universe which are
the waste of energy on the part of good men over things unworthy, if I
heathens; the fight about the fripperies of Ritualism, and the verbal
Pontigny Pilgrimages; the dating of historic epochs from the
Divine Glories of the Sacred Heart--standing in the midst of these
extravagant to claim the public tolerance for an hour and a half, for
the verities which science has brought to light, and which many weary

But to come to closer quarters.
violent exception has been taken is this: 'Abandoning all disguise,
vision backward across the boundary of the experimental evidence, and
our professed reverence for its Creator, have hitherto covered with
life.
is a mild way of describing the storm of opprobrium with which this
  But the first blast of passion being
  First
evidence.
mind--at least of that portion of it which applies itself to physical
  Our theories of light, heat, magnetism, and
  My paper on the
illustrate this point in the amplest manner; and in the Article
incidentally, to make clear, that in physics the experiential
there always grows something finer than mere experience, and that in
the difference between the great and the mediocre investigator.
kingdom of science, then, cometh not by observation and experiment
experiment in a region inaccessible to both, and in dealing with which

Passing the boundary of experience, therefore, does not, in the
  There must have
this tremendous 'chorus of dissent.

  I hold the nebular theory as it
the best scientific intellects of to-day.
and planets were once diffused through space as an impalpable haze,
  What caused the
  What rounded the sun and planets?
  For aeons, the immensity
what we call life.
 They


it may be, of a vaster and wholly Unfathomable Life; or is it the work
vitalised it; but whose own origin and ways are equally past finding
no intrusion of purely creative power into any series of phenomena has
  The assumption of such a power to account for
  It
responsibility of holding up, in contrast with it, that method of
disclose, and in the application of which we can alone hope for
  Holding, then, 'that the nebulae and the solar system,
finished organism, I reaffirm here, not arrogantly, or defiantly, but

Not with the vagueness belonging to the emotions, but with the
put to himself these questions regarding the introduction of life upon
  He will be the last to dogmatise upon the subject, for he
  His
than a protest against the assumption of knowledge which must long, if
perpetual confusion upon earth.
asks his opponents to show him an authority for the belief they so
  They can do no more than point to
  Profoundly
opening mind of man to appease its hunger for a Cause.
of Genesis has no voice in scientific questions.
geology, which it resisted for a time, it at length yielded like
discredited on all hands, by the abandonment of the obvious meaning of
  It is a poem, not a scientific treatise.
aspect it is for ever beautiful: in the latter aspect it has been, and
  To knowledge
physical, and even in our own' free' age to moral, violence.


instructive than the deportment of the Catholic hierarchy of Ireland;
imprudently denouncing him.
on the score of fair play, where so much has been unfair, thinks that
adroitly employed a weapon which I, at an unlucky moment, placed in
  The antecedents of their action cause me to regard it in
think, illuminate not only their proceedings regarding Belfast, but

Before me lies a document bearing the date of November 1873, which,

of the Catholic University in Ireland, to the Episcopal Board of the
ever addressed by Irish laymen to their spiritual pastors and masters.
It expresses the profoundest dissatisfaction with the curriculum
extraordinary fact that the lecture-list for the faculty of Science,
single Professor of the Physical or Natural Sciences.

of education in science: 'The distinguishing mark of this age is its
  The natural sciences have, within the last fifty
pursued with an activity unparalleled in the history of mankind.
Scarce a year now passes without some discovery being made in these
atoms theories formerly deemed unassailable.
physical and natural sciences that the fiercest assaults are now made
  No more deadly weapon is used against our faith than
'
Such statements must be the reverse of comfortable to a number of
accustomed to the unquestioning submission of all other sciences to
  But this is not all:
One thing seems certain,' say the memorialists, viz, that if chairs
Catholic University, very many young men will have their faith exposed
would defend them from.
writhing under the sense of their inferiority in science, and are
scientific training be unattainable at our University, they will seek
a Catholic Professor of Science.

the spontaneous recognition, on the part of the Roman hierarchy, of
this, and still more from what follows: for the most formidable threat
  To the picture of Catholic students seceding to Trinity and
'They will, in the solitude of their own homes, unaided by any guiding
Lyell; works innocuous if studied under a professor who would point
but which are calculated to sap the faith of a solitary student,
solution of his difficulties.

of similar knowledge otherwise derived, the recent Catholic manifesto
adversary, but rather as an evidence of profound uneasiness on the

accustomed practical wisdom.
embodied, the Catholic University at Kensington was brought forth,
outward pressure becoming too formidable to be successfully opposed.

no Irish Catholic is known in connection with the physical and natural
' But this, they ought to know, is the complaint of free and

Catholics of Germany.
scientific achievements of that country, in modern times, are almost
  A vanishingly small fraction of it
of these in Germany is at least as great as that of the Protestants.
'The question arises,' says a writer in an able German periodical,
cannot be referred to want of natural endowment due to climate (for
creations of the German intellect), but purely to outward
  And these are readily discovered in the pressure
out of Catholics every tendency to free mental productiveness.
indeed, in Catholic countries that the weight of Ultramontanism has
  It is in such countries that the very finest
freedom or reform, have suffered extinction.
was more apparent than real, and Hermes, Hirscher, and Gunther, though
persecuted but unflinching Frohschammer, for Doellinger, and for the

Though moulded for centuries to an obedience unparalleled in any other
of independence; demanding a diet more suited to its years than the
  As for the recent manifesto in which
anathema, its character and fate are shadowed forth by the Vision of
  It resembles the
and iron of which rested upon feet of clay.
feet of clay; and the iron, and the brass, and the silver, and the
summer threshing-floors, and the wind carried them away.

friendliness of his Church towards true science, and her right to
  Let us dwell for a moment on the
  When Halley's comet appeared in
dispenser of war, pestilence, and famine, and by order of the Pope the
  An
faithful.
comforted by the assurance that, as in previous instances relating to
comet, victory had been vouchsafed to the Church.

doctrine--that the earth revolves round the sun.
her right to determine what true science is, the Church, in the
Congregation of the Index, delivered, on March 5, 1616, the following

congregation that the false Pythagorean doctrine of the mobility of
writ, which is taught by Nicolas Copernicus, is now published abroad
  In order that this opinion may not further
all other books teaching the like doctrine be suspended, and by this

But why go back to 1456 and 1616?  Far be it from me to charge bygone
to-day.
I am informed, Perrone.
have been scattered abroad for the healing of the nations.
notions of physical astronomy are virtually those of 1456.
boldly that 'God does not rule by universal law.
.
orders a given planet to stand still He does not detract from any law
such and such a time, then to stand still, and then again to move, as
' Jesuitism proscribed Frohschammer for
a direct supernatural act of God, and for asserting that man, body and
  This is the system that now strives for
us, that we are to learn what is allowable in science, and what is

requires extraordinary bravery of mind, or a reliance upon public
Monsignor Capel for his Church.

Bishop of Montpellier to the Deans and Professors of Faculties of
his Church.
of lectures on Physiology given by a professor, of whose scientific
wrongly, had made his course the vehicle of materialism.
suis point donne,' says the Bishop, 'la mission que je remplis au
  "Personne, au temoignage de saint Paul, ne s'attribue
Aaron.
Apôtre, noun devons titre les ambassadeurs de Dieu; et it n'est pas
qu'un envoyé s'accrédite lui-même.
mission; si l'Eglise, au nom de Dieu lui-même, a souscrit me lettres
données et d'entendre, en un sens différent du sien, le rôle qu'elle

d'enseigner les hommes; elle se croit dépositaire de la vérité, non
d'hésitation, mais de la vérité totale, complète, au point de vue
  Bien plus, elle est si sûre de l'infaillibilité que son
indissoluble alliance, que, même dans l'ordre naturel, scientifique ou
puisse être soutenu et adopté par des chrétiens, s'il contredit à des
  Elle considère que la négation volontaire et
d'hérésie; et elle pense que toute hérésie formelle, si on ne la
avec soi la perte certaine de la grâce et de l'éternité.

of the present to the philosophy of the past, and foresees the triumph
  'Avant que le dix-neuvième siècle s'achève, la vieille
du monde.
de tout genre, causés par son indigne rivale; et pendant de longues
humaine après celui de religion, sera suspect aux âmes qui se
Condillac ou d'Helvétius.
naturelles: c'est maintenant l'instrument de combat contre l'Eglise et
  Nous ne les redoutons pas.
the Bishop warns his readers that everything can be abused.
good, but in excess it may injure practical conduct.
mathématiques sont excellentes: et Bossuet les a louées "comme étant
s'accoutume exclusivement à leur méthode, rien de ce qui appartient à
parler de l'ensorcellement et des attraits diaboliqes de la
'
The learned Bishop thus finally accentuates the claims of the Church:
de Latran, "Le vrai ne peut pas être contraire à lui-même: par
nécessairement et absolument fausse.
dans l'examen scientifique de telle ou telle question de physiologie,
de telle ou telle hypothèse, qui est une machine de guerre
mystères de la nature.
.
faconné des mains de Dieu.
la dignité du Créateur et offensant pour son chef-d'oeuvre, de dire
.
  Hérésie encore
y peut compter jusqu'à douze races distinctes!'
*****
The course of life upon earth, as far as Science can see, has been one
higher.
condition and raise itself to a loftier level.
amelioration depend largely upon the growth of conscious knowledge, by
organised.
materialistic colour to the philosophy of this age.
therefore not a thing to be mourned over, but to be honestly
false, wisely sifted and turned to account if it embrace a mixture of
  Of late years the study of the nervous system, and
enquiring minds.
our privilege to accept--the established results of such enquiries,
truth.
exercises over man's moral and intellectual nature, we shall be better
strengthen and purify both.
its dependence?  Assuredly not.
the level it ought to occupy, and from which timid ignorance would

But the light is dawning, and it will become stronger as time goes on.
Even the Brighton "Church Congress" affords evidence of this.
the manifold confusions of that assemblage my memory has rescued two
between Health and Religion, and the address of the Rev.

because undrugged by dogma, coming directly from the warm brain of one
vitality and inherent power of propagation.

embroidered colleagues?  It surely behoves our teachers to come to
by inattention to it, we are defrauded, negatively and positively:
the natural concomitant of good health; positively, by the insertion
which good health would dissipate.
'
become the preacher of a new gospel.
ecstatic moments of the individual does such knowledge come, but
mankind.

should fasting occupy a place in the disciplines of religion?  What is
perplexed with the difficulties of predestination and election, if it
applied, there is moral and religious virtue even in a hydro-carbon?
therefore a spiritual value.
a reasonable materialism we sin and suffer daily.
to the train of deadly disorders over which science has given modern
ensuring his destruction, and thus preventing that moral squalor and
case of the poor.

of Plotinus and Porphyry, are phases of that psychical condition,
which is based the Vedic doctrine of the absorption of the individual
  Plotinus taught the devout how to pass into
  Porphyry complains of having been only once
so united six times in sixty years.
reader's particular attention Dr.
'History of the Conflict between Religion and Science' (Messrs.
 S.
King and Co.
in some of his moods, was accustomed to seize hold of an external
  As states of
substantial identity; but they are connected with the most
  The subjective experiences are

But for those who wish to look beyond the practical facts, there will
  Take the argument of the
  As far as I am aware,
  Some of them,
back the difficulty on his opponent; and they even imagine that it is
  But the raising of
and the argument of the Lucretian remains untouched by anything the

*****
And here it may be permitted me to add a word to an important
of consciousness enter as links into the chain of antecedence and
consciousness; or are they merely by-products, which are not essential
it is certain that I have no power of imagining states of
influencing the transference of motion among the molecules.
thought 'eludes all mental presentation;' and hence the logic seems
uninfluenced by states of consciousness.
admitted by those who hold the automaton-theory, that states of
brain: and this production of consciousness by molecular motion is to
of molecular motion by consciousness.
result, I must reject both.
stand in the presence of two Incomprehensibles, instead of one
  While accepting fearlessly the facts of materialism
mystery of mind, which has hitherto defied its own penetrative power,
impossibility of self-penetration.

enough, which declare that on our dealings with matter depend our weal
  The state of mind which rebels against

highly did I prize the conscious strength and pleasure derived from
intervention of dogma.
not save it from the penalty attached to error.
taught me that the body is no weed, and that treated as such it would
  Am I personally lowered by this change of
  Give me their health, and there is no spiritual
mercy, no work of self-renouncement, no solemnity of thought, no joy
this without the least reference or regard to any purely personal

And now I have to utter a 'farewell' free from bitterness to all my
fain believe, if less noisy, than the antipathy of my foes; and
either not read or failed to lay to heart.
Bishop, 'that men would be strangely headstrong and self-willed, and
society insupportable, and the living in it impracticable, were it not
readiness in restraining themselves, and concealing their sense of
'




  THE REV.

[Footnote: Fortnightly Review.

attention had been directed by several estimable, and indeed eminent,
 James Martineau, as demanding
  I tried to give the essay the
Introduction to Part 11.
' I there referred, and

 'In so
Cosmogony and natural history of man, it lies open to scientific
' And again: 'It turns out that with the sun and moon and
race, quite other things have happened than those which the sacred
' Once more: 'The whole history of the genesis of
' Finally, still more
Theology is an intruder, and must stand aside.
in words of fuller pith, the views which I ventured to enunciate in
 'The impregnable position of Science,' I there say, 'may be
  We claim, and we shall wrest from Theology,
' Thus Theology, so far as it
 Martineau, and Science, so far as I understand

But Mr.
partial citation, I left my readers under the impression that the
  At the opening of the eighty-ninth
he, its principal, delivered an Address bearing the title 'Religion as
which make evident the depth of its author's discontent with my
 I find it difficult to grapple with
  Indeed, logically considered,
containing many passages of exceeding beauty, and many sentiments
is vague and unsatisfactory.
liberal, at times so timid and captious, and at times, if I dare say

At the outset of his Address Mr.
distinctness his 'sources of religious faith.
scrutiny of Nature' and 'the interpretation of Sacred Books.
would have been a theme worthy of his intelligence to have deduced
  But not another
' Having swept with the besom of
Sacred residue; much less give us the reasons why he deems them
 [Footnote: Mr.
unintentionally misleading.
does not mean to restrict it to the Bible.
mention the 'books' beyond those of the Bible to which he would apply
  1879.
magnificent tirades against Nature, intended, apparently, to show the
evolution be true.
  While
vistas of time, the detected marvels of physiological structure, and
life,' he falls, at another, into lamentation and mourning over the
' He claims the
dangers of possible discovery.
the claim, and ruins all confidence in the avowal.
sympathy with modern Science, and almost in the same breath he treats,
doctrine of the Conservation of Energy, as if they were a kind of

His ardour, moreover, renders him inaccurate causing him to see
  In
delivered at Leipzig, three years ago, Du Bois-Reymond speaks thus:
definite atoms in my brain, on the one hand, and on the other hand
or pleasure; I experience a sweet taste, or smell a rose, or hear an
.
 It is absolutely and for ever
atoms should be otherwise than indifferent as to their own position
  It is utterly inconceivable how
'
This language, which was spoken in 1872, Mr.
translates, and quotes against me.

years ago.
a sufficient illustration of the agreement between my friend Du
Materialism,' delivered in 1868, then widely circulated, and reprinted
  The reader who compares the two discourses will see that the
reigns between my friend and me.
Mr.
maintained.
is clear, but now comes my difficulty.
without sensation, much more are they without intelligence.
you, then, to try your hand upon this problem?  Take your dead
dead nitrogen atoms, your dead phosphorus atoms, and all the other
  Imagine
forming all imaginable combinations.
process, is seeable by the mind.
way imagine, how out of that mechanical act, and from these
Are you likely to extract Homer out of the rattling of dice, or the
.
 I can
follow the waves of sound until their tremors reach the water of the
also visualise the waves of aether as they cross the eye and hit the
  Nay, more, I am able to pursue to the central organ the
molecules of the brain thrown into tremors.
by these physical processes.
notion that from these physical tremors things so utterly incongruous
' It is
induce Mr.
opposed to each other.

reviewer of this essay, in the 'New York Tribune,' 'in which Mr.
Martineau delights often impairs the distinctness of his statements by
discussion to the beauty of his imagery, and thus diminishes their
  'To the beauties here referred to I bear willing
effect upon my critic's logic.
the heat, and haze, and haste, generated by its reaction upon Mr.
Martineau's own mind, often produce vagueness where precision is the
practical unfairness where the strictest justice ought to be, and I

In one of his nobler passages Mr.
his college have been educated hitherto: 'They have been trained
folds us round is the life-dwelling of an Eternal Mind; (2) that the
not complete; and (3) that the upper zones of human affection, above
Communion.
and enthusiasm have expanded to catch their light and fire.

we see their beauty and feel their life.
essays here printed, [Footnote: 'Scientific Use of the Imagination.
I thus refer to the 'Communion' which Mr.
"Two things," said Immanuel Kant, "fill me with awe--the starry heavens,
"  And in his hours of
and the pause of reflection has set in, the scientific investigator
  Breaking contact with the
fulness and tone to his existence, but which he can neither analyse
  Though 'knowledge' is here disavowed, the 'feelings',
 Martineau and myself are, I think, very much alike.
nevertheless, censures me--almost denounces me--for referring Religion
  Surely he is inconsistent here.
foregoing words refer to an inward hue or temperature, rather than to
  When I attempt to give the Power which
otherwise, it slips away from me, declining all intellectual
  I dare not, save poetically, use the pronoun 'He'
'Cause.
the objective frames which some of my neighbours try to make it fit,

It is otherwise with Mr.
  He
  He could make his
transform his assumptions into 'objective knowledge.
attempt to do so.
Address to its end.
as if it were fatal to the position oh which its incidence falls.
'The scrutiny of Nature' is one of his sources of 'religious faith:'
the foregoing three assumptions could be planted? Nature, according to
regarding its Author?  If Nature be 'red in tooth and claw,' who is
 Martineau pours the full
Eternal Mind'--even of a Beneficent Eternal Mind--render the world
  It is
assumption.
objective sum of things.
nature--storm, flood, or fire--nor diminish by a pang the bloody
  But it does add the glow of religious
 Martineau.
this I defy him to go; and yet he rashly--it might be said
possible for him to build his religion.

because of its want of cheerfulness.
'preach its own gospel, and devise, if it can, the means of making the
' This is a common argument: 'If you only knew the
Emerson, when, after various disenchantments, he exclaimed, 'I covet
really competent to say this.
Mr.
  I am not, however,
while mistaking it for something objective.
says, 'there is no need to go into the past, as though being missed
  But when once He has been apprehended
Humanity is recognised as the scene of His agency.
 Martineau
the entirely subjective character of this creed, is highly
  His 'proper organs of divine apprehension '--given, we
 Martineau and his pupils, but denied to many of
the very core of his emotions.

 Martineau is most purely emotional that he
rejects subjectivity.
character of John Stuart Mill.
benevolence, honour, purity, having 'shrunk into mere unaccredited
approval, and all presumable accordance with the reality of things.
If Mr.
renders the 'subjective susceptibilities' objective, or how he arrives
pupils would have been his just meed.
lost in an iridescent cloud of words, after exciting a desire which he

'We are,' he says, in another place, 'for ever shaping our
and throwing them to the front, as if they were the photographic
  It is a delusion which affects us all.
Yet somehow the essence of our religion never finds its way into these
turn to pursue it, still retreats behind; ever ready to work with the
reverence, but refusing to be seen, or to pass from a divine hue of
' This is very beautiful, and
the treasury of his own heart.
finely spoken of, the former refusing to pass into the latter, are
'objective knowledge,' on the other, which have drawn this suicidal
 Martineau's battery.

 Martineau's
of its intrinsic gravity, though its author has thought fit to give it
  He analyses and criticises 'the
pomp, and resisted with so much passion.
the physicist; "give me its atoms alone, and I will explain the
"' It is thought, even by Mr.
that in this pamphlet he is answering me.
reader to contrast the foregoing travesty with what I really do say
to say that his molecular groupings and motions _explain_ everything.
In reality, they explain nothing.
association of two classes of phenomena, of whose real bond of union
' [Footnote: Address on 'Scientific
']  This is very different from saying, 'Give me its atoms
'  Mr.
dialogue with the physicist: '"Good," he says; "take as many atoms as
  See that they have all that is requisite to Body [a
" "That is not
mathematicians, but I must have something more.
only be in motion, and of various shapes, but also of as many kinds as
only hydrogen elements to work with?" "So be it," Mr.
consents to answer, "only this is a considerable enlargement of your
of it into several; yet, even at the cost of its monism [put into it
 Martineau], your scheme seems hardly to gain its end; for by
Consciousness?"'
This reads like pleasantry, but it deals with serious things.
last seven years the question here proposed by Mr.
answer to it, have been accessible to all.
is briefly this: 'A man can say, "I feel, I think, I love," but how
answer: The passage from the physics of the brain to the corresponding
  Granted that a definite
simultaneously; we do not possess the intellectual organ, nor
by a process of reasoning, from the one to the other.
together, but we do not know why.
expanded, strengthened, and illuminated, as to enable us to see and
their motions, all their groupings, all their electric discharges, if
corresponding states of thought and feeling, we should be as far as
processes connected with the facts of consciousness?"  The chasm
impassable.
'Belfast Address' is all in the same strain.

 Martineau puts into the mouth

consciousness] does not daunt me at all.
that all along my atoms have been affected by gravitation and
among molecules: there are the inorganic, which can change only their
which can change their order, as in a globule that turns itself inside
  With an adequate number of these our problem will be
"  "Likely enough," we may say ["entirely unlikely," say
if any hitch should occur in the next step, where you will have to
upon your atoms, and fling among them a handful of Leibnitz's monads,
Vorstellungs-faehigkeit which our picturesque interpreters of nature
"'
'But surely,' continues Mr.
"matter" of yours alters its style with every change of service:
bones, it turns up as a prince when large undertakings are wanted.
must radically change our notions of matter," says Professor Tyndall;
"the promise and potency of all terrestrial life.
the required "change in our notions" had been specified, the
test.
you deposit at your bank a round sum ere you start, and, drawing on it
'
The last paragraph of this argument is forcibly and ably stated.
it I am willing to try conclusions with Mr.
  I may say, in
of nature, if accuracy of vision be thereby impaired.
Vorstellungs-faehigkeit, as used by me, means the power of definite
of thought, and of seeing these in their proper relations, without the

now adhere.

alphabet of this question.
each other, and this mutual understanding can only be ensured by
  Physically speaking, however, we need not go
  Let us then travel in company to the Caribbean
  What is that sea, and what is
matter.
of the vessel; after some time the liquid has all disappeared, and
  We have mobility,
  In virtue of
    The glad and secret aid

  From the
must follow it--not upon our legs, however, nor in a ship, nor even in
Vorstellung which Mr.
scorns when it indulges in loose practices.

axial rotation, we track our fugitive through the higher atmospheric
to our familiar Alps.

the vapour condenses, not only to particles of water, but to particles
  These coalesce to stars of snow, which fall
never fail to excite rapture.
of the lapidary to shame, while as to accuracy they render concrete
  Are these crystals 'matter'?
affirmative.

not manifest itself in either the liquid or the vapour.
now is, Was not the power 'potential' in both of them, requiring only
answer for myself in the affirmative.
discuss with Mr.
imponderable formative soul unites itself with the substance after its
  If he should espouse this hypothesis,
Vorstellungs-faehigkeit, with which, in my efforts to think clearly, I
  I should ask, At what moment did the soul come
growing and perfecting itself contemporaneously with its own
Does it move about as a lonely builder, putting the bits of solid
is it distributed through the entire mass of the crystal?  If the
then I should enquire after its shape.
I would ask it to be made clear to me how a thing without these
definition, and ask unusual questions, if haply I might thereby banish
) What were the condition and residence of the soul
dissolved?  Why should a particular temperature be needed before it
way simplified by the assumption of its existence?  I think it
 Martineau
crystal to the bits of water themselves.
count upon his sympathy so far as to believe that he would consider
a separate soul, and for holding the snow-crystal to be matter.

Matter!  Who would have dreamt, without actually seeing its work, that
make the action of the liquid intelligible was the assumption of Mr.
Martineau's 'homogeneous extended atomic solids,' smoothly gliding
  But had we supposed the water to be nothing more
architectural power, which the art of man, even when pushed to its
  I would
 Martineau to consider how inappropriate his figure of a
 The
be honestly kept back from it.
mathematicians' so defined matter as to exclude the powers here proved
 Martineau, instead
for correcting them.
examination of the object defined, and is open to correction or
  Such increased
aether, converting its vibrations from longitudinal into transverse.
Such changes also Mr.
undergo.

with the overlapping margins of Science and Theology, will have
 Emerson.
him we have a poet and a profoundly religious man, who is really and
prospective.
her graver brother Science by the hand, and cheers him with immortal
  By Emerson scientific conceptions are continually
 Our

    Firmly draw, firmly drive by their animate poles.

estimation, all the formal learning expended by Mr.
disquisitions on Force, where he treats the physicist as a conjuror,
  In fact, without this
repulsion, we stand as stupidly dumb before the phenomena of

in my third Lecture on Light, and in the article on 'Matter and Force'

Our further course is here foreshadowed.
under an oak planted by Sir John Moore, the hero of Corunna.
ground near the tree little oaklets were successfully fighting for
  The acorns had dropped into the
  What is
light the tree could not become a tree, however rich the soil, and
'matter.
acknowledged to be motions of matter.
down in the vegetable kingdom than the oak, we might approach much
is not now necessary.

 Martineau
before asked in relation to the snow-star become pertinent.
invite him to go over them one by one, and consider what replies he
  He may retort by asking me, 'Who infused the
question is not this, but another--not who made the tree, but what is
and where?  Mr.
that it is not 'picturesqueness,' but cold precision, that my
  How, I would ask, is this vegetative
tree grew?  and what will become of it when the tree is sawn into

 Martineau may consider the assumption of this soul to be
  But then if the power to build a
notions of the 'potency of matter' is implied in the concession' Think
such necromancy dreamt of as the production of that massive trunk,
these three factors?  In this interaction, moreover, consists what we
  It will be seen that I am not in the least insensible to
presence of this wonder, I feel more perplexed and overwhelmed than
 Martineau himself.

  There is an experiment, first made by
sound-board, through a thin wooden rod, across several silent rooms in
  The
  Every
  All these
not more than a quarter of a square inch in section.
lost.
last, shaken forth into the air by a second sound-board, against which
  Thought ends in amazement when it
it.
and its leaves.
distant air, so does the trunk convey the matter and the motion--the
the umbrageous foliage of the tree.
greenhouse of a friend.
which were in some cases not much thicker than an ordinary pin--hard,
  But at
beauty hidden within it, and broke forth into a mass of fronds, almost
  We stand here upon a higher level of
piano, passing unheard through these tiny boughs, and issuing in what
 Martineau would opulently call the 'clustered magnificence' of the
  Does it lessen my amazement to know that every cluster, and
the molecular structure of these apparently insignificant stems? Not
  Mr.
necessity.
through freedom, my delight in it is all the same.
with a wonder superadded.
his glory was arrayed like one of these.


astonishing building power displayed in crystals and trees.
however, would not be the necessary result; for it would remain to be
  When a boy I
 Watts that the souls of conscious brutes are mere
  And the man who would claim for matter the human soul itself,
  'All that is erected,'

at death, and returns to it at the resurrection, as in the case of
pleasures and eternal pains, proves that, even after death, souls
  God only is incorporeal.
Tertullian, moreover, was quite a physicist in the definiteness of his
  'The materiality of the soul,' he
  A human soul is there
a flame, its tongue feels a cruel agony, and it implores a drop of
  Wanting materiality,' adds
' [Footnote: The
 Alglave recently brought to light for the
the 'Cours d'Histoire Moderns' of that most orthodox of statesmen, M.
Guizot.
 Guizot, 'these citations to
materiality of the soul was an opinion not only permitted, but
' Dr.
obviously forget their own antecedents.
the early Church renders them the direct offspring of a 'materialism'
]
I have glanced at inorganic nature--at the sea, and the sun, and the
the fern and the oak.
liberated the vapour, exerts a subtler power on the nutriment of the
  It takes hold of matter wholly unfit for the purposes of
gives, the former to the vegetable, and carries the others away.
Planted in the earth, bathed by the air, and tended by the sun, the
spun, and the whole is woven to a texture wonderful even to the naked
  Does

outward manifestations from which feeling is usually inferred.
even these are not entirely absent.
see that a leaf can close, in response to a proper stimulus, as
 Hooker
the Dionaea.
represented by a drowsier consciousness in the vegetable world.
all events, no line has ever been drawn between the conscious and the
gradations, that is impossible to say where the one ends and the other

In all such enquiries we are necessarily limited by our own powers: we
enable us to observe; nothing more.
in the vegetable world depend wholly upon our capacity to observe and
  Alter the capacity, and the evidence would alter too.
Would that which to us is a total absence of any manifestation of
multiplied?  To such a being I can imagine not only the vegetable, but
differing only in degree from those exaggerated manifestations, which,
observation.

but upon those that we possess.
and atmosphere offer themselves as the nutriment of the vegetable
inorganic nature, offer itself to the animal world.
certain inorganic substances--water, for example--the vegetable

utilise the vegetable world immediately, having chemical forces strong
the vegetable world mediately; that is to say, after its finer
 But in
  The animal world is, so
nature.

which I picture life as immanent everywhere.
out the idea that the life here spoken of, may be but a subordinate
subordinate to the living man.
not dogmatically imposed.
upon, the idea has ethical vitality; but, stiffened into a dogma, the
takes its place.

statement.
the earth was once a molten mass.
an atmosphere, and covered by a sea, but also crowded with living
  The question is, How were they introduced?  Certainty may be
religion; but in the contemplation of probabilities the thoughtful
  The conclusion of Science, which
present, would undoubtedly be that the molten earth contained within
as the planet cooled.
this conception, arise solely from the fact that the theologic
  Did the latter
against its rival.
associated hopes and fears--and not only by these, which are more or
its possessor above the atmosphere of self, and which the theologic

Were not man's origin implicated, we should accept without a murmur
inorganic nature.
and no other.
life, and by our hopes and fears regarding the life to come.
is traversed by the emotions, anger rising in the weaker heads to the
of the law would be an act agreeable to God, and serviceable to man.
But this foolishness is more than neutralised by the sympathy of the
earnest theme is adhered to, such sympathy is ever ready for an honest
  None of us here need shrink from saying all that he has a right
  We ought, however, to remember that it is not only a band of
innocent guise 'of education,' that we are opposing.
some extent of our own household, including not only the ignorant and
lovers of freedom moreover, who, though its objective bull be riddled
  But
and prevent it from ever slipping out of the region of courtesy into
and presented in unmitigated strength.

happened to be filled by a Catholic priest of great critical
brunt of battle long before Doellinger.
knew, inculcated the belief that every human soul is sent into the
  In a
the philosopher here alluded to, was hardy enough to question this
parents, the act of creation being, therefore, mediate and secondary
  The Jesuits keep a sharp look out on all temerities of this
upon Frohschammer.
Index, and stamped with the condemnation of the Church.
King Maximilian II.
his researches, and loved to liberate and foster science.
his liberal concession of power to the Jesuits in the schools, he did
superstitious predecessor Ludwig I.
Prince, Ludwig would not tolerate the interference of the Roman party
]  The Jesuit notion does not
  According to it, the Power whom
present to us under the guise of a 'Manufacturer' of atoms, turns out
souls.
 Carlyle, that this
profit to the human heart seems derivable from this mode of regarding

But if the Jesuit notion be rejected, what are we to accept?
than the 1/120th of an inch in diameter.
it to be so, as much as the seed of a fern or of an oak.
go to the making of it into a man.
period of gestation drawn from matter?  I think so undoubtedly.
there be anything besides matter in the egg, or in the infant
already asked with reference to the stars of snow may be here
  Mr.
babe of its wonder; but is this the case?  I figure it growing in the
on the part of either father or mother, and appearing in due time a

eye alone--with its lens, and its humours, and its miraculous retina
  Consider the ear with its tympanum, cochlea, and Corti's
brain, and employed by it to sift, separate, and interpret, antecedent
  All
without his knowledge, the secret of his own organisation having been
these latter days.
all this is accomplished.
question on which I never ventured an opinion.
starts as 'a beggar,' it is, in my view, because the Jacobs of
  Mr.
no disenchantment.
the explanation of this mystery; the Ages, let us hope, will at length

There are men, and they include amongst them some of the best of the
either warmth or colour.
for them, and they live their noble lives untouched by a desire to
  There are, on the other hand,
under its stimulus, attain to moral heights which have never been
  Different spiritual climates are necessary for the
must be accorded them.
experience of the second class to illustrate the most pervading need.
The world will have religion of some kind, even though it should fly
' What is really
  But
practical materialism of the present, as well as from the torn
 It is now in danger of being stupefied by
  I look, however, forward to a
mere hints and glimpses, during moments 'of clearness and vigour,'
minds than ours--purer and mightier, partly because of their deeper





  FERMENTATION, & ITS BEARINGS ON SURGERY & MEDICINE.

Association, October 19, 1876.

live, is its desire and tendency to connect itself organically with
to be what it is.
is studied, the more clearly comes into view the vast and varied debt
skill, valour, and well-directed strength first replenished and
  Our prehistoric fathers may have been savages, but
  They founded agriculture by the
  They
as ministers, instead of rivals in the fight for life.
the claims of luxury added themselves to those of necessity, we find
  We have no historic account of
practised, and its produce relished, more than two thousand years ago.
Theophrastus, who was born nearly four hundred years before Christ,
  It is extremely difficult to
was first brewed, the desire of man to quench his thirst with this
threw in the way of its manufacture.

glad the heart of man.
drank of the wine, and experienced the consequences.
and beer possess so old a history, a very few years ago no man knew
  Indeed, it might be said that until
the agencies which come into play in the manufacture of beer, of the
vicissitudes to which it is subject.
the brewer have resembled those of the physician, both being founded
  By this is meant the observation of facts,
an intelligent mastery over them.
experience the conditions, not the reasons, of success.
contend, and has still to contend, against unexplained perplexities.
Over and over again his care has been rendered nugatory; his beer has
sustained, of which he has been unable to assign the cause.
hidden enemies against which the physician and the brewer have
of day, thus preparing the way for their final extermination.


fermentation.
Swiss chalet; and this is what I saw.
cask with a very large bunghole carefully closed.
cherries which had lain in it for fourteen days.
filled with the fruit, an air-space being left above the cherries when
  I had the bung removed, and a small lamp dipped
  Its flame was instantly extinguished.
the air had entirely disappeared, its place being taken by carbonic
 [Footnote: The gas which is exhaled from the lungs after the
also which effervesces from soda water and champagne.
cherries: they were very sour, though when put into the cask they were
  The cherries and the liquid associated with them were then

vessel of cold water, and issued at the other side.
end of the tube was placed a bottle to receive the spirit distilled.
The flame of small wood-splinters being applied to the boiler, after a
by the cold of the water, and fell in a liquid fillet into the bottle.
On being tasted, it proved to be that fiery and intoxicating spirit

The cherries, it should be remembered, were left to themselves, no
  In this respect what has
  At the vintage the
own action.
disappears, and at the end of a certain time the unintoxicating
  Here, as in the case
spontaneous will appear more clearly by-and-by.

does not set to work in this way.
not with the juice of fruits, but with the juice of barley.
barley having been steeped for a sufficient time in water, it is
grain to germinate; after which, it is completely dried upon a kiln.
It then receives the name of malt.
and decidedly sweeter to the taste than the original barley.
ground, mashed up in warm water, then boiled with hops until all the
called the wort.
possible; then, instead of abandoning the infusion, as the wine-maker
places it in vessels each with only one aperture open to the air.
after the addition of the yeast, a brownish froth, which is really new
troughs prepared to receive it.
is a proof that the fermentation is active.

tub?  What is this yeast, and how did the brewer become possessed of
  The brewer
 of yeast; he collects 40, or it may be 50,
  The yeast has, therefore, augmented from four to five fold
  Shall we conclude that this additional yeast
reminded of that seed which fell into good ground, and brought forth
examination, this notion of organic growth turns out to be more than a
  In the year 1680, when the microscope was still in its
found it composed of minute globules suspended in a liquid.
knowledge rested until 1835, when Cagniard de la Tour in France, and
turned microscopes of improved definition and heightened powers upon
  The
from the growth of a minute plant now called Torula (or Saccharomyces)
  Spontaneous generation is therefore out of the question.
The brewer deliberately sows the yeast-plant, which grows and
  This discovery marks an

But where did the brewer find his yeast?  The reply to this question
brewer found his barley.
from preceding generations.
continuity the present with the past, we should probably be able to
that employed by some Egyptian brewer two thousand years ago.
may urge that there must have been a time when the first yeast-cell
  Granted--exactly as there was a time when the first
  Let not the delusion lay hold of you that
  Both the
of antiquity, and in this our day there is no more proof of the
generation of the other.

spontaneous; but I was careful to add, in what sense spontaneous will
' Now this is the sense meant.
wine-maker does not, like the brewer and distiller, deliberately
does not consciously sow in them any plant, or the germ of any plant;
any kind have had anything to do with his operations.
fermented grape-juice is examined, the living Torula concerned in
  How is
comes the life so invariably developed there?
You may be disposed to reply, with Turpin and others, that in virtue
with the vivifying atmospheric oxygen, runs spontaneously and of its
  I have not the slightest
in support of it.
am acquainted with it, snaps asunder under the strain of scientific
  It is, as far as I can see, the evidence of men, who
experimenters.
investigations of this delicate kind.
of the wine-vat, what is the decision of experiment when carried out
grape be so boiled as to destroy such germs as it may have contracted
  In contact with germless air the
  All the materials for spontaneous
no life developed, and no sign of that fermentation which is the
  Nor need you resort to a boiled liquid.
grape is sealed by its own skin against contamination from without.
an ingenious device Pasteur has extracted from the interior of the
never acquires the power to ferment itself, nor to produce
 [Footnote: The liquids of the healthy
  Pure blood,
ferment or putrefy in contact with pure air.
in the interior of the grape that the origin of the life observed in

What then is its true origin?  This is Pasteur's answer, which his
  At the time of
outer surface of the grape and of the twigs which support the grape.
Brush these particles into a capsule of pure water.
turbid by the dust.
particles are seen to present the appearance of organised--cells.
Instead of receiving them in water, let them be brushed into the pure
  Forty-eight hours after this is done, our
plant being accompanied by all the other signs of active fermentation.
What is the inference to be drawn from this experiment?  Obviously
include the germs of that life which, after they have been sown in the
  Wine is sometimes objected to on
responsibility of nature.
parasite to the surface of the grape; and the art of the wine-maker
ignorantly bringing--two things thus closely associated by nature into
  For thousands of years, what has been
wine-grower.

Nor is it necessary to impregnate the beer-wort with yeast to provoke
  Abandoned to the contact of our common air, it sooner
fermentation, instead of being agreeable, would be disgusting to the
  By a rare accident we might get the true alcoholic

fermentation; but our ordinary air is the vehicle of numberless germs
  Some
  The germs of our
infusion like beer-wort, exposed to the air, is almost sure to be
  In fact, the maladies of
whose forms and modes of nutrition differ materially from those of the

Working in an atmosphere charged with the germs of these organisms,
action of any one of them.
experimenter, who, moreover, avails himself of every means of
land of pitfalls.
proved himself to be.
ferments of our air, and to study their pure individual action.
by him, let us fix our attention more particularly upon the growth and
 Let it be
air.
large quantities of carbonic acid gas--a compound, as you know, of
  The oxygen thus consumed by the plant is the free
liquid.
which inspire oxygen and expire carbonic acid.
liquid even when the vigour of the plant has reached its maximum, we
  The yeast has grown and
  And could
from the surrounding liquid, it is certain that it would cease to act

What, then, are the conditions under which the yeast-plant must be
on the facts already referred to suggests a reply, and rigid
  Consider the Alpine cherries in
  Consider the beer in its barrel, with a single
imbibe oxygen, but to pour forth carbonic acid.
volumes of oxygen necessary to the production of this latter gas?  The
it would be totally incompetent to supply the necessary oxygen.
other way can the yeast-plant obtain the gas necessary for its
the oxygen exists, not free, but in a state of combination.
decomposes the sugar of the solution in which it grows, produces heat,
the decomposition is our familiar alcohol.
then, is a result of the effort of the little plant to maintain its
oxygen is cut off.
without air.

to warn us against errors which have 'been committed over and over
  It is not all yeast-cells that can thus live without air and
  They must be young cells which have caught
  But once
saccharine infusion absolutely purged of air, where it will continue
of the infusion.
will be by no means so vigorous as when it had a supply of free

Does the yeast-plant stand alone in its power of provoking alcoholic
vegetable forms no other could be found capable of acting in a similar
  And here again we have occasion to marvel at that sagacity of
  Not
exercise a wise selection in picking it out from others, and giving it
  Place an old boot in a moist place, or expose
blue-green mould, which is nothing else than the fructification of a
  Do not imagine that the
which are abundant in the air, have been sown, and have germinated, in
proper soil.
fermentable liquid, which has been previously so boiled as to kill all
access to the mixture; the Penicillium will grow rapidly, striking
  Test
find in it a trace of alcohol.
plant, push it down deep into the liquid, where the quantity of free
begins to act as a ferment, supplying itself with oxygen by the
results of the decomposition.
in a similar manner.
production of alcohol, but cut off from free oxygen they act as
produces it, only less copiously.
these facts we are indebted to Pasteur.

invariable correlative of life, being produced by organisms foreign to
  But the substance itself may also have
  The
so at bottom, as shown by Schleiden and Schwann, are all living
  Cherries, apples, peaches, pears, plums, and grapes, for
  And

important fact that all ripening fruit, exposed to the free
approximately equal volume of carbonic acid.
ripe fruits were placed in a confined atmosphere, the oxygen of the
given out.
  After the oxygen had
exhaled by the fruits, which at the same time lost a portion of their
of acid was not augmented.
importance, and Bérard had the sagacity to remark that the process

Thus the living cells of fruits can absorb oxygen and breathe out

fruit-cells as suddenly die, or will they continue to live as yeast
This is a question of extreme theoretic significance.
answered affirmatively by the able and conclusive experiments of
explained by the experiments and the reasoning of Pasteur.
only showed the absorption of oxygen and the production of carbonic
completing the evidence that it was a case of real fermentation,

*****
So full was Pasteur of the idea that the cells of a fruit would
in his laboratory, while conversing on these subjects with M.
he exclaimed, 'I will wager that if a grape be plunged into an
by the continued life of its own cells--that they will act for a time
' He made the experiment,
  He then extended the
  Placing under a bell-jar twenty-four plums, he filled the
plums uncovered.
the jar, and compared them with the others.
extraordinary.
sweet; the others were firm and hard, their fleshy portions being not
  They had, moreover, lost a considerable quantity of
  They were afterwards bruised, and the juice was
  It yielded six and a half grammes of alcohol, or one per
  of the total weight of the plums.
in the grapes first experimented on by Pasteur, could any trace of the
  As previously proved by
cells of the fruit itself, after air had been denied to them.
moreover, the cells were destroyed by bruising, no fermentation
  The fermentation was the correlative of a vital act, and it

Luedersdorf was the first to show by this method that yeast acted,
its organised character.
them on a ground glass plate, and found that with the destruction of
act as a ferment totally disappeared.

  To the
with the conception of molecular motion, and the changes produced by
natural than to see in the process of fermentation a simple
surrounding molecular groups the overthrow of its own tottering
  Broadly considered, indeed, there is a certain amount
very kernel of the phenomena when he overlooked or contemned the part
  He looked at the matter
eye.
knowledge which its revelations would have poured in upon his mind.
His hypothesis, as I have said, was natural--nay it was a striking
actions; but it was an error, and as such has proved an ignis fatuus

*****
I have said that our air is full of the germs of ferments differing
the latter.
overshadow and choke the flowers.

  It will, after a time, turn sour, separating
  Place a drop of this sour milk under
  You see the minute
Brownian motion.
for it is another motion that we have now to seek.
observe a greater disturbance than ordinary among the globules; keep
from it a long eel-like organism, tossing the globules aside and

receives the name of vibrio, you soon detect numbers of them.
these organisms, and other analogous though apparently motionless
  They
alcoholic ferment of sugar.
milk and it will continue sweet.
becoming sour.
it swarming with shorter organisms, sometimes associated with the
of motion.
it will never putrify.
moist; in summer weather it soon stinks.
the fetid chop under a powerful microscope; it is seen swarming with
  These organisms, which
exhibiting grave specific differences are grouped together under this
] are the agents of all putrefaction.
germs from your meat and it will remain for ever sweet.
to see that within the world of life to which we ourselves belong,
discernment, but which, nevertheless, has the most important bearing

And now let us reason together as regards the origin of these
  A granular powder is placed in your hands, and you are
  You examine it, and have, or have not,
  To
powder, and soon after find a mixed crop of docks and thistles
  Until this powder was sown neither docks nor
  You repeat the
  From fifty different
  What
condition,' you would say, 'to affirm that every grain of the powder
that both dock and thistle-seeds form, at all events, part of the
' Supposing a succession of such powders to be placed in your
the size of impalpable dust particles; assuming that you treat them
obtain a definite crop--may be clover, it may be mustard, it may be
of the particles, or of the plants that spring from them, does not
  Without a shadow of misgiving
germs of the life observed.
science, an experiment more conclusive nor an inference safer than

Supposing the powder to be light enough to float in the air, and that
powder in the palm of hand.
the hand produce a definite living crop, with the same logical rigour
dust.
Penicillium glaucum, to which I have already referred, are light
  A cut apple, a pear, a tomato, a slice of
of paste, or a pot of jam, constitutes a proper soil for the
  Now, if it could be proved that the dust of the air when
neither the air, nor the soil, nor both together can produce it, it
contains the germs of Penicillium as that the powders sown in your

But how is the floating dust to be rendered visible?  In this way.
Build a little chamber and provide it with a door, windows, and
  Let an aperture be made in one of the shutters
  Close the door and windows so that
  The track
room.
luminous track will become fainter and fainter, until at last it
  What
which, thus illuminated and observed, is as palpable to sense as dust
  In the still air the dust
finally, by this self-cleansing process, the air is entirely freed

Thus, far, I think, we have made our footing sure.

covered with warm water; you thus extract the juice of the beef in a
  By properly boiling the liquid and filtering it,
  Expose a
chamber; and expose a number of vessels containing precisely the same
  In three days every one of the latter
swarming with the bacteria of putrefaction.
three years, the beef-tea within the chamber is found in every case as
when it was first put in.
the air within and that without save that the one is dustless and the

Clinch the experiment thus: Open the door of your chamber and allow
  In three days afterwards you have every vessel
putrefaction.
case of the powder sown in your garden.
building fifty chambers instead of one, and by employing every
and viscera; of vegetables of the most various kinds.
cases you find the dust infallibly producing its crop of bacteria,
together, are ever able to produce this crop, your conclusion is
crop which has appeared in your infusions.
inference of experimental science more certain than this one.
presence of such facts, to use the words of a paper lately published
affirm that these swarming crops of bacteria are spontaneously

Is there then no experimental proof of spontaneous generation?  I
of a fact, and to deny its possibility, are two different things,
  In
falls in with the theoretic beliefs of some of the foremost workers of
and the honesty to expose, the weakness of the evidence adduced in its

*****
And here observe how these discoveries tally with the common practices
  Heat kills the bacteria, colds numbs them.
housekeeper has pheasants in charge which she wishes to keep sweet,
the infant bacteria, and thus postpones the evil day.
milk she also extends its period of sweetness.
Alps I made a few experiments on the influence of cold upon ants.
Though the sun was strong, patches of snow still maintained themselves
  The ants were found in the warm grass and on
  Transferred to the snow the rapidity of
  Ina few seconds a vigorous ant, after
lie practically dead upon the snow.
would revive, to be again smitten with death-like numbness when
  What is true of the ant is specially true
  Their active life is suspended by cold, and with it
  This is the
  The fishmonger,
ice, stays the process of putrefaction by reducing to numbness and
his fish would remain sweet and sound.
into which these bacteria are pushed by warmth that renders a single
and Glasgow.
glaciers have come to the surface forty years after their interment,
  But the most
which was found incased in ice.
laid bare its flesh was sweet, and for some time afforded copious

Beer is assailable by all the organisms here referred to, some of
is open to attack from the bacteria of putrefaction.
the particular beverage the brewer wishes to produce, these foreign
  The cells of
  The other
being beaded so as to resemble necklaces.
produces a fermentation and a flavour peculiar to itself.
out of your beer and it remains for ever unaltered.
them will your beer contract disease.
in the vessels employed in the brewery; even in the yeast used to
  Consciously or unconsciously, the art of the
  His aim is to paralyze, if he cannot

For beer, moreover, the question of temperature is one of supreme
on the continent of Europe a complete revolution in the manufacture of
  When I was a student in Berlin, in 1851, there were certain
making its way into public favour.
called the process of low fermentation; the name being given partly
issuing through the bunghole, falls to the bottom of the cask; but
  The other
expeditious, and cheap.
the production of the beer; in low fermentation, ten, fifteen, even
  Vast quantities of ice, moreover,
  In the single
consumed annually in cooling the wort and beer.
obvious and weighty drawbacks, the low fermentation is rapidly
  Here are some statistics
in 1860, 1865, and 1870:
                    1860.
    1870.



281 to 18, while the number of low-fermentation breweries rose from
  The sole reason for this vast change--a change which
additional command which it gives the brewer over the fortuitous
  These ferments, which, it is to be remembered,
below 10°C, and as long as they are reduced to torpor the beer remains
  The beer of low
being thus enabled to dispose of it at his leisure, instead of forcing
too long.
antiseptic to beer.
hence the strong impregnation with hop juice of all beer intended for

These low organisms, which one might be disposed to regard as the
and perfect as it is, has no power to show us the real beginnings of
economy of nature.
place.
and consumers of dead matter, animal and vegetable, reducing such
acid and water.
restricted classes of them that are really dangerous to man.
difference in their habits is worthy of special reference here.
or rather the oxygen of the air, which is absolutely necessary to the
absolutely deadly to the vibrios which provoke the butyric acid
  This has been illustrated by the following beautiful

A drop of the liquid containing those small organisms is placed upon
for, to magnify them sufficiently, it is necessary that the
organisms.
is in contact with the air, and incessantly absorbs it, including the
  Here, if the drop be charged with bacteria, we have a zone of
  But through this living zone, greedy of oxygen and
the film.
peripheral colleagues continue active.
be enclosed in the film, round it the bacteria will pirouette and
motions cease.
vibrios of butyric acid.
that are first killed, the central ones remaining vigorous while
  Pasteur, moreover, filled two vessels with
killed its vibrios in half an hour; through the other he led carbonic
  It was
the thought of life without air, and its bearing upon the theory of

*****
We now approach an aspect of this question which concerns us still
  A few
clothes from the cascade which had been my shower-bath, I slipped upon
into my naked shin.
vigorous health at the time, I hoped for a speedy recovery.
clean pocket-handkerchief into the stream, I wrapped it round the

fit to quit my room.
clean, uninflamed, and entirely free from matter.
bit of goldbeater's-skin, I walked about all day.
itching and heat were felt; a large accumulation of matter followed,
  The water-bandage was restored,
applied, but it made matters worse.
alarmingly, until finally I had to be carried on men's shoulders down
of friends, I was immediately placed in the best medical hands.
the morning after my arrival in Geneva, Dr.
abscess in my instep, at a distance of five inches from the wound.
two were connected by a channel, or sinus, as it is technically
application of the lance.

asunder the sound tissue of my instep, and kept me for six weeks a
removed from my wound and the goldbeater's-skin applied to it, I
sweet infusions of fish, flesh, and vegetable.
sealed infusions had been exposed for weeks, both to the sun of the
turbidity or sign of life.
greater number of them swarmed with the bacteria of putrefaction, the
room.
its appearance leads me to infer that it would have been found equally
my incautiously opened wound, and that they were the subtile workers
effects which might easily have proved fatal.

man who combines the penetration of the true theorist with the skill
one continued demonstration of the theory that the putrefaction of

eminent men who have visited his hospital, and from the opinions
greatest steps ever made in the art of surgery was the introduction of

The interest of this subject does not slacken as we proceed.
with the cherry-cask and beer-vat; we end with the body of man.
are persons born with the power of interpreting natural facts, as
such interpretation.
belonged the illustrious philosopher Robert Boyle, whose words in
  'And
Physic,' 'that he that thoroughly understands the nature of ferments
ignores them, to give a fair account of divers phenomena of several
properly understood without an insight into the doctrine of
'
Two hundred years have passed since these pregnant words were written,
their truth.
has been most strictly demonstrated.
surgery proper, and enter the domain of epidemic disease, including
  The most striking
of indefinite self-multiplication possessed and exercised by both.
know the exquisitely truthful figures regarding leaven employed in the
  A particle hid in three measures of meal leavens it
  A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.
a particle of _contagium_ spreads through the human body and may be so
  Consider the effect
smallpox.
  It is
multiplies, and it always reproduces itself.
indebted for a series of masterly researches, wherein he exposes the
transmutation of one ferment into another.
saying it is impossible.
of this word, though the use of it is unsparingly ascribed to him;
alleged transmutation, while he has been always able to point out the
allowed error to march in upon them.
illustration of the care necessary in these researches, and of the
do well to consult the Rev.
 H.
Heterogenesis' in the October number of the Popular Science Review.

discourse.
germs of different organisms; the mere accident of first possession
  In different
same infusion may so alter as to be successively taken possession of
  Such cases have been adduced to show that the
whereas they are simply cases in which different germs, because of

By teaching us how to cultivate each ferment in its purity--in other
all others,--Pasteur has enabled us to avoid all these errors.
where this isolation of a particular organism has been duly effected
organism is ever observed.
remained a Bacterium, the Vibrio a Vibrio, the Penicillium a
  Sow any of these in a state of
subsequent crop.
your crop is small-pox.
scarlatina.
crop is cholera.
_contagium_ as the microscopic organisms just enumerated do to their
  No wonder then, with
and growing daily in strength, that reproductive parasitic life is at
the body increase there and multiply, directly ruining the tissue on
poisonous compounds within the body.
us with a presumption almost amounting to demonstration, is clinched
with which living organisms are as closely and as indissolubly

And here, if you will permit me, I would utter a word of warning to
  We have now reached a phase of this question
be thrown upon the manner in which contagious and infectious diseases
  To this end the action of various ferments upon
of each special organism concerned in the production of each specific
abroad as sources of further infection.
accurate enquiries that we can obtain final and complete mastery over
  Hence, while abhorring cruelty of all kinds, while
my own pursuits never call upon me to inflict,--an unbiassed survey of
me to conclude, that no greater calamity could befall the human race
  A lady
ago, that science was becoming immoral; that the researches of the
  I
referred, dealt with the laws and phenomena of inorganic nature; but
biology, or the science of life; and that in this new direction
temporary suffering, would in the end prove a thousand times more
  I said this because I saw
such a knowledge of epidemic diseases as will enable us finally to

This is a point of such capital importance that I should like to bring
  In
 Davainne and Rayer,
disease called splenic fever, small microscopic organisms resembling
significance to the observation.
on the fermentation of butyric acid, wherein he described the organism
Davainne that splenic fever might be a case of fermentation set up
him and Rayer.
subsequent research.

fever by Pollender and Brauell.
 Burdon Sanderson
disorder.
proved to hang for years about localities where it had once prevailed;
constitute the _contagium_, because their infective power was found to
  But other facts established an intimate
all the facts caused Dr.
existed in two distinct forms: the one 'fugitive' and visible as
brought within the grasp of the microscope.

 Sanderson was writing this report, a young German
reference to the researches of Koch made in this country.
]
district, was already at work, applying, during his spare time,
fever.
aqueous humour an ox's eye to be particularly suitable for their
  With a drop of the aqueous humour he mixed tiniest speck of a
warmed it suitably, and observed the subsequent action.
first two hours hardly any change was noticeable; but at the end of
at the end of three or four hours they attained from ten to twenty
  At the end of a few additional hours
the original rods.
observed to stretch through several fields of the microscope.
Sometimes they lay in straight lines parallel to each other, in other
figures; while sometimes they formed knots of such bewildering
filaments through the confusion.

have been added to our previous store, but the addition would have
  Koch, however, continued to watch the

length of the organism was studded with minute ovoid bodies, which lay
  By-and-by
by a long row of seeds or spores.
confirmed in all respects by the celebrated naturalist, Cohn of
  They clear up the existing
for in the most conclusive manner, Koch proved the spores, as
in its most deadly and persistent form.

  There was
that was the inoculation with it of living animals.
guinea-pigs and rabbits, but the vast majority of his experiments were
  Inoculating them with the fresh blood of an animal
within twenty or thirty hours after inoculation.
determine how the _contagium_ maintained its vitality.
infectious blood containing the rod-like organisms, in which, however,
Dr.
' It maintained its power of infection
 He then dried blood containing the
conditions.
wetted this dust, allowed it to dry again, permitted it to remain for
to various other tests.
had been treated in this fashion for four years, he inoculated a
fresh from the veins of an animal suffering from splenic fever.
was no single escape from death after inoculation by this deadly
  Uncounted millions of these spores are developed in the
of these millions is competent to produce the disease.
this formidable parasite is Bacillus anthracis.
that to produce its characteristic effects the _contagium_ of splenic
diseased animal may be eaten with impunity by mice.
hand, the disease refuses to be communicated by inoculation to dogs,
  In their blood Bacillus anthracis ceases to
  Pasteur announced more than six years ago the
both by fission and by spores.
experiments on the permanence of the _contagium_ in the form of spores.
See 'Etudes sur la Maladie des Vers à Soie,' pp.
]
Now the very first step towards the extirpation of these _contagia_ is

stoppage of the plague of _pébrine_ by the researches of Pasteur.
[Footnote: Surmising that the immunity enjoyed by birds might arise
lowered their temperature artificially, inoculated them, and killed
  He also raised the temperature of guinea-pigs after
  It is needless to dwell for a moment on
]  One small item of statistics
  In the single district of Novgorod in
of death by splenic fever, among horses, cows, and sheep were
  Nor did its ravages confine themselves to the animal world,
twenty-eight human beings perished in the agonies of the same disease.

on the point which I wish to submit to your consideration.
animal,' says Dr.
day has declined food and shown signs of general disturbance, begins
after becomes weak and listless.
becomes frequent and often difficult, and the temperature rises three
chiefly the muscles of the back and loins, usher in the final collapse
trunk or extremities, diminution of temperature, mucous and
and nose.
fifty-six thousand horses, cows, and sheep, and five hundred and
two or three years.
have no means of knowing.
  The
the knowledge which reveals to us the nature, and which assures the
paid for it?  It is exceedingly important that assemblies like the
this, and that the properly informed sense of the community should
tender, become agents of cruelty by the imposition of short-sighted
  It is a modern
of which must be corrected by an instructed public opinion.


and try to extract from our labours such further profit as they can
  For more than two thousand years the attraction of light
and for more than two thousand years fermentation was effected without
  In science one discovery grows out of
  Thus,
invented, and brought to a considerable degree of perfection.
the growth of knowledge.
mass of floating globules, but he had no notion that the globules were
  This was proved in 1835 by Cagniard de la Tour and Schwann.
Then came the question as to the origin of such microscopic organisms,
'Annales de Chimie' for 1862, is the inauguration of a new epoch.


  There
when exported.
losses were ften inflicted on the wine-grower.
diseases was traced to the life of an organism.
temperature which killed these ferments of disease, proving it to be
  By the simple
Centigrade, he rendered it inalterable, and thus saved his country the
  He then went on to vinegar--vin aigre, acid
little fungus called Mycoderma aceti.
grape juice into alcohol, and Mycoderma aceti converts the alcohol
  Here also frequent failures occurred, and severe losses
  Through the operation of unknown causes, the vinegar
putridity.
sufficient to destroy it.
them to their living causes, and showed that the permanent health of
  He passed
years ago had all but ruined the silk husbandry of France.
plague, which received the name of _pébrine_, was the product of a
silkworm, spread throughout its body, and filled the sack which ought
  Thus smitten, the worm
nothing to spin.

by his singular power of combining facts with the logic of facts,
insect when the disease which assailed it could with certainty be
  Pasteur's devotion to this enquiry cost him dear.
restored to France her silk husbandry, rescued thousands of her
from his labours with one of his sides permanently paralysed.
last investigation is embodied in a work entitled 'Studies on Beer,'
unchangeable.
with wine and vinegar, but the principles which it involves are sure

There are other reflections connected with this subject which, even
to every thoughtful mind in this assembly.
floating dust of the air, of the means of rendering it visible, and of
of germless infusions and moteless air.
wafted particles, during historic and pre-historic ages, have
putrefying wounds; consider the loss in places where there are plenty
anywhere founded; consider the slaughter which has hitherto followed
loose, often producing a mortality far greater than that of the battle
disease the self-same floating matter has frequently, if not always,
thus enabled to sow pestilence and death over nations and
conclusion that all the havoc of war, ten times multiplied, would be

This preventible destruction is going on to-day, and it has been
regarding its cause being vouchsafed to the suffering sentient world.
We have been scourged by invisible thongs, attacked from impenetrable
let in upon the murderous dominion of our foes.
excite in me the thought that the rule and governance of this universe
inscrutable Power, at once terrible and beneficent, in whom we live
different to those usually resorted to.
such propitiation is knowledge; the second is action, shaped and
  Of knowledge we already see the dawn,
is to follow has its unfailing source and stimulus in the moral and
sense of duty, in his compassionate sympathy with the sufferings of
  'How often,' says Dr.
work on Typhoid Fever,--' How often have I seen in past days, in the
coffin, the mother in the sick-bed in muttering delirium, and nothing
poor neighbour, who in too many cases paid the penalty of kindness in
ground already won I look forward with confident hope to the triumph
  The
physician, but to the public, whose intelligent co-operation is
a question of time.
the triumphs f surgery as practised at your doors.



********************
XIII.

[Footnote: The Nineteenth Century, January 1878.

built in the Alps, there is a small lake, fed by the melted snows of
  During the early weeks of summer no trace of
of July, or the beginning of August, swarms of tailed organisms are
and rushing with audible patter into deeper water at the approach of
  The origin of this periodic crowd of living things is by no
  For years I had never noticed in the lake either an
otherwise informed, I should have found the conclusion of Mathiole a
vivifying action of the sun.

spontaneous generation of creatures quite as high as the frog in the
  Here, as elsewhere,
large.
in believing in cases of spontaneous generation which would now be


Nile.
which they fed; while winged insects, serpents, rats, and mice were

The most copious source of this life without an ancestry was
investigation, the conclusion that flesh possesses and exerts this
  I well remember when a child of
coils of maggots laid bare within the mass.
hesitation I jumped to the conclusion that these maggots had been
  I had no knowledge which could
irresistible.
race, and the belief here enunciated was that of the world for nearly

To the examination of this very point the celebrated Francesco Redi,
 and Cosmo III.
Tuscany, and a member of the Academy del Cimento, addressed himself in
  He had seen the maggots of putrefying flesh, and reflected on
  But he was not content with mere reflection,
upon their imperfect observations.
from freshness to decay, prior to the appearance of maggots he
alighting on it.
progeny of these flies.

finally tested.
  Placing fresh
the meat putrefied in the ordinary way, it never bred maggots, while

odour of the meat could rise.
they laid their eggs, but, the meshes being too small to permit the
  They
  By a series of such
maggots in meat, and with it doubtless many related beliefs.
combat was continued by Vallisneri, Schwammerdam, and Réaumur, who
scientific minds of their day.
organisms as those which formed the subject of their researches, the

But the discovery and improvement of the microscope, though giving a
regarding spontaneous generation, brought also into view a world of
ultimate particles of matter--as to suggest an easy passage from atoms
  Animal and vegetable infusions exposed to the air were
unaided vision, but perfectly visible to an eye strengthened by the
  With reference to their origin these organisms were
  Stagnant pools were found full of them, and the
minute furnished the precise condition necessary to give new play to

The scientific world was soon divided into two hostile camps, the
  On the one
molecules,' and the latter assuming the existence of a special
living things.
Spallanzani, who in 1777 published results counter to those announced
completely overthrow the convictions based upon the labours of his
  Charging his flasks with organic infusions, he sealed
heat of boiling water, and subsequently exposed them to temperatures
  The infusions continued
trace of life was found.

Spallanzani's experiments depended wholly on the locality in which he
  The air around him must have been free from the more obdurate
long afterwards proved by Wyman, have infallibly yielded life.
his refutation of the doctrine of spontaneous generation is not the
  Nor is it in any way upset by the fact,
obtained none.
differences.
careful, operating in different places on the same infusion, in the
obtain it; then its well-established absence in the one case proves
other.

as oxygen was afterwards shown to be generally essential to life, it
have been due to the lack of this vitalising gas.
doubt, Schulze in 1836 half filled a flask with distilled water to
  First boiling his
daily into his flask air which had passed through a series of bulbs
suspended in the air were supposed to be destroyed.
August this process was continued without any development of

Here again the success of Schulze was due to his working in
risky one.
acid unless the most special care is taken to detain them.
repeatedly failed, by repeating Schulze's experiments, to obtain his
  Others have failed likewise.
through the bulbs, and to render the method secure, the passage of the
to the very core of each bubble, to touch the surrounding liquid.
if this precaution be observed, water will be found quite as effectual
  By the aid of an air-pump, in a highly infective
through bulbs containing water, and afterwards through vessels containing
  The germs were not
objection that the air had been injured by being brought into contact

The brief paper of Schulze, published in Poggendorf's Annalen for
by Schwann.

eggs of flies.
putrefaction itself.
that it also is a phenomenon attendant on the development of life.
This was first proved in the paper now alluded to.
flesh in a flask filled to one-third of its capacity with water,
calcined air.
infusoria, no putrefaction; the flesh remained unaltered, while the
 Schwann
result.
decompositions of organic matter attendant on the multiplication
  These organisms were derived not from
by a sufficiently high temperature.
opponent of the doctrine of spontaneous generation than Schwann,
and others equally opposed to it on the side of the doctrine.

further revealed by Helmholtz in 1843.
separated a sterilised putrescible liquid from a putrefying one.
sterilised infusion remained perfectly intact.
liquid of the putrefying mass--for that could freely diffuse through
stopped by the membrane, that caused the putrefaction.
Schroeder and von Dusch struck into this enquiry, which was
  These able experimenters
infusions.
putrescible liquids remained perfectly sweet after boiling.
formed a conspicuous exception to the general rule.
after boiling, though supplied with carefully filtered air.
researches of Schroeder bring us up to the year 1859.

best established facts of previous investigators.
Hétérogénie, and its author was F.
  Pouchet, Director of the
  Ardent, laborious, learned, full
energy into the enquiry.
the cold critical faculty more than this one--calm study in the
experiments, care in their execution, skilful variation of conditions,
beyond doubt or question.
subject was full of danger--danger not lessened by the theoretic bias
  This is revealed by the opening words of
la generation spontanée était encore Fun des moyens qu'emploie la
quell procédés on pouvait parvenir à en mettre les phénomènes en
strong curb.
with results diametrically opposed to theirs.
upon experiment and argument upon argument, spicing with the sarcasm
  In view of the
assumption of atmospheric germs.
points.
dans tout, avaient leurs germes dissembles dans l'atmosphère, dans la
totalement obscurci, car ill devraient s 'y trouver beaucoup plus
  Il n'y a
'  Recurring to the subject, he
fer.
this hardihood of argumentative assertion was sure to influence minds
  Had Pouchet known that
which the sun freely shines, he would hardly have ventured upon this

Pouchet's pursuit of this enquiry strengthened the conviction with
 I
disciplined experimenter.
look at things as Nature offers them to our inspection, but to force
himself.
  Yet the
the whole field of enquiry.
and so incapable of definite solution, that when Pasteur made known
their regret, earnestly exhorting him to set a definite and rigid
field.
already famous pupil, 'de rester trop longtemps dans ce
'--Annales de Chimie et de Physique, 1862, vol.
 p.

Sciences has had good reason to revise this 'counsel.

the closely related question of fermentation, Pasteur took up this
  His work and his
  In
existing in the Atmosphere,' which must for ever remain classical.
the most ingenious devices he collected the floating particles of the
microscopic examination.
particles.
crops of microscopic organisms.
and confirmed the experiments of Schwann, which had been contested by
  He also confirmed the
  He showed that the cause
through the air; that there were aerial interspaces which possessed no
 Standing on the Mer de Glace, near the
flasks containing organic infusions.
thus supplied with glacier air showed signs of life afterwards, while
the plains, became crowded with life.
caves under the Observatory of Paris, and found the still air in these
  These and other experiments,
scientific reader, and accompanied by a logic equally severe, restored
life does not appear without the operation of antecedent life.

researches of the most momentous kind.
won from his enquiries to the preservation of wine and beer, to the
utter destruction of the silk husbandry of France, and to the
animals, including man.
Professor Lister has introduced into surgery, is shown by a letter
 [Footnote: 1 P.
]  Professor
principle which could have conducted the antiseptic system to a
  The strictures regarding defects of reasoning, to
author, but no shade upon Pasteur.

derived from the eggs of flies; Schwann proved putrefaction itself to
Redi.
subject, has been vastly extended by Professor Cohn, of Breslau.
putrefaction,' he says, 'can occur in a nitrogenous substance if its

are admitted either accidentally or purposely.
direct proportion to the multiplication of the bacteria, it is
influences which either hinder their development or kill them.
bactericidal media are therefore antiseptic and disinfecting.
[Footnote: In his last excellent memoir Cohn expresses himself thus:
Proteinmolecule, oder von einem unorganisirten Ferment ableitet, oder
Faeulnisstheorie zu zimmern versucht, hat zuerst den Satz "keine
']
It was these organisms acting in wound and abscess which so frequently
destruction by the antiseptic system that now renders justifiable
 The
practised upon.
the most brilliant operation might not be rendered nugatory by the
derived from the knowledge that all power of mischief on the part of
  But the action
 The power
characteristic of living things, coupled with the undeviating fact of
belief long entertained by penetrating minds, that epidemic diseases
 'There begins to be
wherein the diseases which are most fatal to animal life, and the
together by what must least be called a very close analogy of
' [Footnote: Report of the Medical Officer of the Privy
 5.
is daily gaining converts, a contagious disease may be defined a
which multiplies at his expense, appropriating his air and moisture,
incident to its growth.


radiant heat in its relations to the gaseous form of matter occupied
  When air was experimented on, I had to
surprised to notice that, at the ordinary rate of transfer, such
 The
found to be a most searching test for suspended matter both in water
that furnished by the most powerful microscope.
a beam I examined air filtered by cotton-wool; air long kept free from
air, and air filtered by the deeper cells of the human lungs.
cases the correspondence between my experiments and those of
perfect.
luminous beam to be optically pure and therefore germless.
worked at the subject both by experiment and reflection, on Friday
Royal Institution.
practical reasons, I ventured to direct public attention to the
  Such was my first contact with this

This letter, I believe, gave occasion for the first public utterance
 Bastian in relation to this subject.
inform me, as others had informed Pasteur, that the subject 'pertains
reasoning, and warned me that before what I had done could be undone
'  With far less
was far bolder than Pouchet in his experiments, and far more
  With organic infusions he obtained
atoms and molecules of inorganic liquids passing under his
dignify by calling them 'living organisms.
held that bacteria or allied organisms are prone to be engendered as
fermentations, just as independently as other less complex chemical
'--Bastian, Trans.
 xxvi.
258.

apparently also as regards a large portion of the medical profession,
uncertainty similar to that which followed the publication of

It is desirable that this uncertainty should be removed from all
removed from the minds of medical men.
therefore, I propose discussing this question face to face with some
regards spontaneous generation, entertains views adverse to mine.
a one it would be easy to name; but it is perhaps better to rest in
  I shall therefore simply call my proposed co-enquirer
  With him at my side, I shall endeavour, to the best of my
that he who reads may understand.

  I ask my friend to step into the
of thin turnip slices barely covered with distilled water kept a
  After digesting the turnip for four or five
infusion as clear as filtered drinking water.
test its specific gravity, and find it to be 1006 or higher--water
  A number of small clean empty flasks, of the shape shown
  One of them is slightly warmed with a

cools, contracts, and is followed in its contraction by the infusion.
Thus we get a small quantity of liquid into the flask.
this liquid carefully.
neck, carrying the air of the flask along with it.
seconds' ebullition, the open neck is again Plunged into the infusion.
The steam within the flask condenses, the liquid enters to supply its
of its volume.
thousand flasks with a thousand different infusions.

rows of handy little Bunsen burners underneath it.
bath, is nearly filled with oil; a piece of thin plank constitutes a
  The wood is perforated with circular
plunge itself in the oil, which has been heated, say, to 250° Fahr.
Clasped all round by the hot liquid, the infusion in the flask rises
  Steam
for five minutes.
seizes the neck near its junction with the flask, and partially lifts
  The steam does not cease to issue, but its
  With a second pair of tongs held in one hand, the
other hand a Bunsen's flame or an ordinary spirit flame is brought
  The glass reddens, whitens, softens,
the canal is completely blocked up.
severed neck being withdrawn, the flask, with its contents diminished
hermetically.

and containing strong infusions of beef, mutton, turnip, and cucumber,
 Thither,
co-enquirer to accompany me.
is favourable to putrefaction.
count out fifty-four flasks, with their liquids as clear as filtered
  In six flasks, however, the infusion is found muddy.
We closely examine these, and discover that every one of them has had
 Air has entered
 My colleague
  Examined with a pocket-lens,
the muddy liquid; but regarded with a magnifying power of a thousand
Leeuwenhoek estimated the population of a single drop of stagnant
infusion would be this many times multiplied.
microscope is crowded with organisms, some wabbling slowly, others
  They dart hither and
quickly round, that the retention of the retinal impression transforms
  And yet the most
  From the rod-like
'bacteria'--a term, be it here remarked, which covers organisms of

Has this multitudinous life been spontaneously generated in these six
the flasks by the entering air?  If the infusions have a
of the fifty-four uninjured flasks to be accounted for?  My colleague
by no means necessary; that the air itself may be the one thing needed
  We will examine this point
  But meanwhile I would remind him that I am working on
 He
above the infusion favours the production of organisms; and he
vegetables, by the hypothesis that fermentation has begun in such
stifled the incipient life and stopped its further development.
[Footnote: _Beginnings of Life_,  vol.
]  This is the new
  Had its author pierced a tin of preserved
truth, he would have found it erroneous.
would have found, not an outrush of gas, but an inrush of water.
have noticed this recently in tins which have lain perfectly good for
  Modern tins, subjected to
  From time to time, moreover,
infusions of turnip, hay, beef, and mutton, in iron bottles, and
atmospheres--pressures, it is needless to say, far more than
  After ten days
and teeming with life.
rational foundation, and which could never have seen the light had the

Our fifty-four vacuous and pellucid flasks also declare against the
 We expose them to a warm Alpine sun by day, and at night
  Four of them have been
remaining ones as clear as at the commencement.
putrefaction or of life in any of them.
two groups of twenty-three and twenty-seven respectively (an accident
  The question now is
infusions.
something more.
pair of steel pliers, snip off the sealed ends of the group of
  Each snipping off is of course followed by an
  We now carry our twenty-seven flasks, our pliers, and
feet above the hayloft, from which ledge the mountain falls almost
  A gentle
and snow-fields of the Oberland mountains.
air which must have been for a good while out of practical contact
  I stand carefully to leeward of
blown towards them.
flame of which I plunge the pliers, thereby destroying all attached
  Then I snip off the sealed end of the flask.
Prior to every snipping the same process is gone through, no flask
flame.
vivifying mountain air.

stove, in a temperature varying from 50° to 90° Fahr, and in three
hayloft invaded by organisms--two only of the group remaining free
  After three weeks' exposure to precisely the same
given way.
necks, the flasks being shaped to produce this result.
in the Alps, as clear, I doubt not, and as free from life as they were
 [Footnote: An actual experiment made at the
]
What is my colleague's conclusion from the experiment before us?
supplied with the most invigorating air, have shown no sign of
  And as to the others, I almost shrink from
generative.
air of the loft--which is connected through a constantly open door
has produced the effects observed?  What is this something?  A sunbeam
of the loft, would show it to be laden with suspended dust particles.
Indeed the dust is distinctly visible in the diffused daylight.
it have been the origin of the observed life?  If so, are we not bound
germs of the life observed?
The name of Baron Liebig has been constantly mixed up with these
  'We have,' it is said, 'his authority for assuming that
' True, but with Liebig
  It meant,
unstable molecules.
dead particles?  If my co-enquirer should reply 'Yes,' then I would
Where, amid the multitude of vital phenomena in which her operations
notion that the sowing of dead particles can produce a living crop?'
microscope in relation to these questions, a mind so penetrating could
  He,
error so gross as that in support of which his authority has been
  Were he now alive, he would, I doubt not, repudiate the use
scientific one, founded on profound conceptions of molecular
  But this view by no means involves the notion that the
contemptuously calls them--is followed by the sprouting of infusorial

*****
Let us now return to London and fix our attention on the dust of its
  Suppose a room in which the housemaid has just finished her work
shutter through which a sunbeam enters and crosses the room.
floating dust reveals the track of the light.
the aperture to condense the beam.
converged to a cone, at the apex of which the dust is raised to almost
  Defended
light.
burned without leaving visible residue.
flame upon the floating matter has been elsewhere thus described:
*****
In a cylindrical beam which strongly illuminated the dust of our
  Mingling with the flame,
intensely black smoke.
the beam, the same dark masses stormed upwards.
than the blackest smoke ever seen issuing from the funnel of a
the conclusion that the apparently pure flame of the alcohol-lamp
liberated carbon.

moment, and was thus answered: A red-hot poker was placed underneath
  A large hydrogen
with augmented copiousness those whirling masses of darkness.
being out of the question, what is the blackness?  It is simply that
from the track of the beam of all matter competent to scatter its
  When the flame was placed below the beam, the floating matter
rose into the beam, jostled aside the illuminated particles, and
transparency.
of the agent which renders all things visible.
unseen, the black chasm formed by the transparent air, while, at both
solid under the powerful illumination.
Dust and Disease', vol.
]
*****
Supposing an infusion intrinsically barren, but readily susceptible of
with this unilluminable air, what would be the result?  It would never
  It might, however, be urged that the air is spoiled by its
  Oxygen passed through a spirit-lamp flame is, it
maintenance of life.
which is based, however, upon the unproved assumption that the air has
  Let a condensed beam be sent through a
  The track of the beam
revealing the dust.
or simply turn it mouth downwards and leave it undisturbed for a day
  Examined afterwards with the luminous beam, no track is
  The
interior surface of the flask.

the dirt, we might coat that surface with some sticky substance.
then, without 'torturing' the air in any way, we have found a means of
matter.

spontaneously purified air upon putrescible infusions.
chambers, or cases, are accordingly constructed, having glass fronts,
  Through the bottoms of the chambers
length of the tubes, being within the chambers.
a free connection rough sinuous channels between the inner and the
  Through such channels, though open, no dust will reach the
  The top of each chamber is perforated by a circular hole two
  This
the shank of a long pipette, ending above in a small funnel.
shank also passes through a stuffing-box of cotton-wool moistened with
pipette is not likely in its motions up and down to carry any dust
  The annexed woodcut shows a chamber, with six
channels a b which connect the air of the chamber with the outer air.

or three days.
windows, the air is found laden with floating matter, which in three
  To prevent its ever rising again, the
glycerine.
six tubes in succession by means of the pipette.
without further precaution, every one of the tubes would putrefy and
  The liquid has been in contact with the
infection must be destroyed.
into a bath of heated oil and boiling the infusion.
requisite to destroy the infection depends wholly upon its nature.
minutes' boiling suffices to destroy some _contagia_, whereas two
  After the infusion
putrescibility has been in no way affected by the boiling, is

With such chambers I tested, in the autumn and winter of 1875-6,
the flesh and viscera of domestic animals, game, fish, and vegetables.
More than fifty chambers, each with its series of infusions, were
  There was no shade of uncertainty in
  In every instance we had, within the chamber,
than a year--without the chamber, with the same infusion, putridity
  In no instance was the least
its inherent life, and placed in contact with air cleansed of its

Remembering then the number and variety of the infusions employed, and
by the heterogenists themselves; remembering that we have operated
even in untrained hands, easy and decisive proofs of spontaneous
our own--if this pretended generative power were a reality, surely it
  Speaking roundly, I should say
given to it, but it has nowhere appeared.

every residue of doubt as to the ability of the infusions here
  We open the back doors of our sealed
have access to our tubes.
pellucid and sweet--flesh, fish, and vegetable extracts purer than
  Three days' exposure to the dusty air
life.
putrefaction when the contaminating agent is applied.
colleague to reflect on these facts.
absolute immunity of a liquid exposed for months in a warm room to
exposed to dust-laden air?  He must, I submit, bow to the conclusion
  And
the air, are in the liquid miraculously kindled into living things, he
organisms diffused through the atmosphere.

number of 940.
Royal Society on January 13, 1876.
having been completely sterilised by three minutes' boiling.
care had been taken that the temperatures to which the flasks were
  The
there was no corroboration of his results.
the question of warmth, thirty degrees being suddenly added to the
  Waiving all
requirement also.
Royal Institution, were suspended in perforated boxes, and placed
in Jermyn Street.
generation of organisms in hermetically sealed tubes.
in the washing-room of the bath for nine days.
the boxes, and read off twice or three times a day, showed the

beginning.
  A
spontaneous generation.
Turkish Bath hovered about this point, falling once as low as 106°,
  The
  The higher

Taking the actual experiment we have made as a basis of calculation,
them would become filled with organisms.
82 strengthens our case, proving as it does conclusively that not in
through the air, but in discrete particles, suspended in the air and
  Our
the hayloft as to permit 10 per cent of our flasks to take in air
  A quarter of a century ago Pasteur
discontinuous.
of 20 flasks opened on the plains escaped infection, while 19 out of
  Our own experiment at
of the flasks opened in the hayloft being smitten, while not one of

The power of the air as regards putrefactive infection is incessantly

Institution, 42 per cent.
  escaped.
In 1877 the proportion in the same laboratory was 68 per cent.
smitten, to 32 intact.
infusions in 1877 was due to the presence of hay which diffused its
regards infective virulence to the air of the Alpine loft.
ask my friend to bring his scientific penetration to bear upon all the
  They do not prove spontaneous generation to be
' My assertions, however, relate not to 'possibilities,'
prove the evidence on which the heterogenist relies to be written on

My colleague will not, I am persuaded, dispute these results; but he
the same subject have arrived at conclusions different from mine.
freely granted; but let me here recur to the remarks already made in
failure of others to confirm his results by no means upsets their
  To fix the ideas, let us suppose that my colleague comes to
and obtains confirmatory results; and that he then goes to University
contradictory results.
selfsame substance is barren in Albemarle Street and fruitful in Gower
him the literally infinite differences existing between different

adventurous conclusion that an organic infusion is barren at one place
one that the atmospheres of the two localities which have had access

that fruitfulness may be due to errors of manipulation, while
  It is only
every novice to obtain the former.
the conscientious experimenter, whatever his theoretic convictions may
when there is no escape from it to the conclusion that the life
neutralise or avoid.

  Supposing my colleague to operate
of the same infusion--and that 50 of them prove fruitful and 50
  Are we to say that the evidence for and against heterogeny is
would treasure up the 50 fruitful flasks as 'positive' results, and
'negative' results.
 William Roberts, is an

'British Medical Journal,' 1876, p.
]  Not such, I trust, would
  As regards the 50 fruitful flasks
scrutiny, and not by one repetition only, but by many, assure himself
  Such faithful scrutiny fully
in all other cases, the evidence in favour of spontaneous generation

The botanist knows that different seeds possess different powers of
 [Footnote: I am indebted to Dr.
various illustrations of such differences.
that a subject of such high scientific importance should not have been
  Here the scoundrels who deal in killed
]  Some are killed by a
it for several hours.
while Pouchet made known to the Paris Academy of Sciences in 1866,
Brazil, germinated after four hours' boiling.
vary as much among themselves as the seeds of the botanist.
localities the diffused germs are so tender that boiling for five
localities the diffused germs are so obstinate, that many hours'
germination.
would produce differences as great as those here described.
greatest endurance that I have ever observed--and I believe it is the

As regards their power of resisting heat, the infusorial germs of our
heads: Killed in five minutes; not killed in five minutes but killed
killed in thirty minutes but killed in an hour; not killed in an hour
not killed in three but killed in four hours.
cases of survival after four and five hours' boiling, some survivals
  Thus far has
upon even eight hours as the extreme limit of vital resistance.
Probably more extended researches (though mine have been very
  It is also
destroyed by a temperature far below that of boiling water.
presence of such facts, to speak of a death-point of bacteria and

'What present warrant,' it has been asked, 'is there for supposing
six, or eight hours' boiling?'  Regarding naked specks of protoplasm I
  I know nothing about them, save as the creatures
  But I do affirm, not as a 'supposition,' nor an
as a matter of the most undoubted fact, that the spores of the hay
mentioned.
guidance of the knowledge that they are germs, can be destroyed by
  This needs explanation.
finished bacterium perishes at a temperature far below that of boiling
final sensitive condition the more readily will it succumb to heat.
Seeds soften before and during germination.
description of the following process will suffice to make its meaning

An infusion infected with the most powerfully resistent germs, but
gradually raised to its boiling-point.
soft and plastic state immediately preceding their development into
  The infusion is then put aside in a warm
  If for twenty-four, we might have the
  To anticipate this, at
the boiling temperature, which, as before, destroys all germs then
  The infusion is again
repeated.
finally kill the last of them.
if it be repeated a sufficient number of times.
and turnip infusions, which had proved specially obstinate when
by this method of discontinuous heating, three minutes being found
boiling failed to accomplish.
infusions of various kinds of hay, including those most tenacious of
  Not one of them bore the ordeal.
foreseen before they were realised, so that the germ theory fulfils

When 'naked or almost naked specks of protoplasm' are spoken of, the
  Such

this way.
protective influence.
surrounding a pea keeps it hard in boiling water for a time sufficient
  The pellicle prevents
  A greasy or
would act to some extent in a similar way.
of green vegetables to sterilisation,' says Dr.
'appears to be due to some peculiarity of the surface, perhaps their
surfaces.
atmospheric germ is wetted would be an interesting subject of
  A dry microscope covering-glass may be caused to float
  A sewing-needle may be similarly kept floating,

Were it not for some specific relation between the matter of the germ
impossible.
interchange of matter between the germ and its environment; and this
encompassing liquid.
the destruction of the germ in boiling water.
in the 'Philosophical Transactions' for 1877, I add the following

so affected by desiccation and other causes as practically to prevent
  The body of a germ,
powerfully the insinuation of water between its constituent molecules.
It would be difficult to cause such a germ to imbibe the moisture
destruction in a liquid of high temperature.


body, of the spores of Bacillus subtilis, they do as a matter of
heat of boiling water.
in the way of this fact, established as it has been by hundreds, if

*****
We have now to test one of the principal foundations of the doctrine
  With this
been kept for six months in one of our sealed chambers, exposed to
 The one is a mineral solution containing in proper
bacteria, the other is an infusion of turnip-it might be any one of a
 Both liquids are as
them.
 A mutton-chop, over
up, has lain for three days upon a plate in our warm room.
offensively.
microscope, it is found swarming with the bacteria of putrefaction.
With a speck of the swarming liquid I inoculate the clear mineral
an infant with vaccine lymph.
liquids have become turbid throughout, and instead of being barren as
 The experiment may be repeated a
 To the naked eye the
the naked eye they are alike at the end, being both equally muddy.
Instead of putrid mutton-juice, we might take as a source of infection
 So
either to the clear mineral solution, or to the clear turnip infusion,

We now vary the experiment thus: Opening the back-door of another
solution and the pure turnip infusion side by side, I drop into each
 The effect here is tardier
 In three days,
muddy, and swarming as before with bacteria.
mineral solution which, in our first experiment, behaved in a manner
there is not a bacterium to be found in it.
it is equally innocent of bacterial life.
with the solution and the infusion a hundred times with the same
 Always in the case of the latter the sowing, of the
the dry germinal matter kindle into active life.
the deportment of the mineral solution as described by others.
experiments would lead me to say that the development of the
]
experiment?  Is it not as clear as day that while both liquids are
after they have been once, fully developed, only one of the liquids is

see that there is no escape from it.
opinion, which I consider erroneous, that bacteria exist in the air,
 The inference remains, that
the active state, the other is not.

experiments with the mineral solution.

living active organism, and observing that no bacteria appeared in the
neither bacteria nor their germs existed in the air.
Germany the ablest literature of the subject, even that opposed to
and abroad have based upon it a triumphant demonstration of, their
 It is proved, they say, by the deportment of the mineral
hence, if, on exposing a thoroughly sterilised turnip infusion to the
generated.
 Bastian: 'We can only infer that whilst
such organisms are able to arise _de novo_ in the boiled organic
' [Footnote: 'Proceedings of the Royal Society,' vol.
 p.
130.

The datum is--'A mineral solution exposed to common air does not
similarly exposed develope bacteria, they must be spontaneously
'  The inference, on the face of it, is an unwarranted one.
But while as matter of logic it is inconclusive, as matter of fact it
 London air is as surely charged with the germs of
 The inference just
when your sterilised organic infusion is exposed to optically puree
I be able to preserve my turnip-juice side by side with your saline
free connection with the general atmosphere, on the sole condition
visibly free from floating dust, while three days' exposure to that
regards the argument here set forth he who runs may read, and he who

subject, more important if possible than the foregoing one, but like
phraseology, logical and rhetorical, in which it has been set forth.
The subject now to be considered relates to what has been called 'the
'  Those who happen to be acquainted with the
after challenge has been issued to panspermatists in general, and to
this cardinal point.
heterogenist.
some luckless person upsets the vessel so that the heated fluid
body-hand, arm, or face.
doubt.
rapidly destructive effect upon the living matter of which we are
' [Footnote: Bastian, 'Evolution,' p.
]  And lest it
case, renders the body susceptible to heat, he refers to the action of
 'The
is something intrinsically deleterious in the action of boiling water
organisation.
 135.
another place: 'It has been shown that the briefest exposure to the
'
 p.

difference between the dry bacterial matter of the air, and the wet,
 The one can
born there, while both of them are copiously developed in a sterilised
 Inferences, as we have already seen, founded on the
logic be extended to the other.
heterogenist has done, thus repeating as regards the death-point of

five minutes.
the solution not one of them escapes destruction.
the turnip infusion if it be inoculated with the living bacteria
 In both cases the dead
no fresh organisms will arise.
we inoculate our turnip infusion with the desiccated germinal matter

The 'death-point' of bacteria is the maximum temperature at which they
 If,
temperature of 150°, the death-point lies somewhere between these two
  Vaccine lymph, for example, is proved by Messrs.
Braidwood and Vacher to be deprived of its power of infection by brief
 This may be
diffused in the lymph, which constitute the real _contagium_.
time, however, be named for the application of the heat, the term
  An infusion, for example, which will
will succumb to five days' exposure to a temperature 50° Fahr.
that of boiling.
liquids are not only killed by five minutes' boiling, but by less than
temperature as the vaccine.
bacteria of the turnip infusion [Footnote: In my paper in the
experimentally the difference, as regards rapidity of development,
softened water-germs proving to be practically as rapid as from
 This preparedness of the germ for rapid
destruction.

prepare and employ our inoculating substance in the following simple
of water, and let a perfectly sterilised turnip infusion be inoculated
 After three hours' continuous boiling the

atmosphere well charged with desiccated hay-germs.
this case infects itself without special inoculation, and its
  On the
the germinal dust of a sapless kind of hay mown in 1875.
of flasks were charged with turnip infusion prepared in the infected
for periods varying from 15 minutes to 240 minutes.
groups only one was sterilised--that, namely, which had been boiled
  Every flask of the nine groups which had been boiled
bred organisms afterwards.
infusions.
flasks, containing cucumber infusion prepared in an infected
 Every
  On the same day,
and 360 minutes; and these three flasks were completely sterilised.
Animal infusions, which under ordinary circumstances are rendered
infusions in an atmosphere infected with hay-germs.
March, for example, five flasks were charged with a clear infusion of
and 300 minutes respectively.
crowded with organisms, and the same happened to a perfectly pellucid
  The cases are to be
manifested by infusions of the most diverse kinds.

necessary to dwell for a single instant on the one-sidedness of the
destroyed by 'the briefest exposure to the influence of boiling
' An infusion proved to be barren by six months' exposure to
with full-grown active bacteria, fills itself in two days with
temperature much below that of boiling water.
this result to the desiccated germinal matter of the air is without
  This is obvious without going beyond the
  But we have gone far beyond the argument, and proved
by the briefest exposure to the influence of boiling water to be a
  The whole logical edifice raised upon this basis falls
germs, being destroyed at 140°, must, if they appear after exposure to

Through the precautions, variations, and repetitions observed and
vessels employed in this enquiry have mounted up in two years to

Besides the philosophic interest attaching to the problem of life's
interests involved in the application of the doctrines here discussed
  The antiseptic system, at which I have
the gravest moment follow in the wake of clear theoretic insight.
Surgery was once a noble art; it is now, as well, a noble science.
Prior to the introduction of the antiseptic system, the thoughtful
something in the air which often defeated the most consummate
  That something the antiseptic treatment destroys or
  At King's College Mr.
while a fine shower of mixed carbolic acid and water, produced in the
the subsequent dressing being duly saturated with the antiseptic.
St.
 Callender employs the dilute carbolic acid
preventing of the wound from becoming a nidus for the propagation of

antiseptic system has struck deep root in Germany.

present position of the 'germ theory' in reference to the phenomena of
however, are terribly strong--from those based on actual observation.
I should have liked to follow up the account I have already given
'Fermentation.
unknown German physician named Koch, on splenic fever, by an account

which we can follow from the beginning to the end of its life cycle.
[Footnote: Dallinger and Drysdale had previously shown what skill and
history of the monads.
smitten animal in the state say of short motionless rods.
rods are placed in a nutritive liquid on the warm stage of the
some cases, side by side, forming in others graceful loops, or
  We
spores, each with death potentially housed within it, yet not to be
subtilis.
Anthracis.
 Pasteur in
  His recent investigations regarding the part it
labours of that remarkable man.
and fallen in this land of pitfalls, a multitude of opposing
  In
 Joubert,

observers in France had supposed themselves to be dealing solely with
active.
results due solely to the latter had been frequently made the ground
former.
irregularities disappeared, every result obtained receiving the
  On studying the account of this masterly
to the difficulties and dangers of the experimenter's art came home to
difficile de l'expérimentation les plus habiles bronchent à chaque
'
 p.
]





[Footnote: Presidential Address, delivered before the Birmingham and
]
A MAGNET attracts iron; but when we analyse the effect we learn that
the magnet being due to the difference of two unequal and opposing
  Social progress is for the most part typified by this duplex
  As a general rule, every advance is balanced by a
deterioration.
introduced for the benefit of society at large that does not bear
  Science, like other things, is subject to
being bad for it under another.

  Its home is
experimenter, and the cabinet of the meditative observer of nature.
Different atmospheres are required by the man of science, as such, and
  Thus the facilities of social and international
are such undoubted boons to the man of action, react to some extent
  Their tendency is to break up that
the scientific investigator.

scientific side have habitually sought isolation.
certain period of his career, formally renounced dining out.
lives apart from the bustle of the world in his quiet home in Kent.
Mayer and Joule dealt in unobtrusive retirement with the weightiest
  There is, however, one motive power in the
afford to treat with indifference; and that is, the cultivation of
as an isolated individual, but as a member of society.
this aspect, overcoming alike the sense of possible danger and the

To look at his picture as a whole, a painter requires distance; and to
of a succeeding age is desirable.
ourselves in idea into the future, and thus survey with more or less
  We sometimes hear it decried,
  I
  I think, on
science no higher samples of intellectual conquest are recorded than
  One of the most salient of
consideration during the coming hour.

product of incalculable antecedent time.
intellectual textures have been woven for him during his passage
back to an abysmal past.
from that past is the yearning to let in the light of principles on
  He has been described by
cause-seeking animal--in whom facts excite a kind of hunger to know
  Never, I venture to say, in the
to, both among men of science and the general public, than during the
  I say 'the general public,' because it is
labours to the society of his colleagues and his peers, but shares, as
enquiry.


  He loves the image of the
  A
a tree may be defined as an organism with life and direction within.
In the light of these definitions, I close with the conception of
  The order and energy of the universe I hold to be inherent,
arbitrary will, exercised by what Carlyle would call an Almighty
  But the two conceptions are not so much opposed to each
  In one fundamental particular they at all events
  They equally imply the interdependence and harmonious
of the universal organism to the working of the whole.

recognised as now.
general insight to which our fathers had attained, and which, in early
scientific man.
quantitative--expressible by numbers--leading, it must be added,
regard with dread.
first to work their way from darkness into twilight, and from twilight
  There is no solution of continuity in science.
given to any man, however endowed, to rise spontaneously into

  Here, as in other cases, we have first the
the series implying the first.
gravitation with which the name of Newton is identified, notions more
transcendent mathematical genius raised it to the level of a
  The whole of his deductions, moreover, rested upon the
  Newton shot beyond his predecessors; but his
merit would assign to them a fair portion of the honour of discovery.

they receive complete expression.
practically sealed, and the truth of one is often practically
truth.

natural law; and, as regards the connection and interaction of natural
writings of Leibnitz, Boyle, Hooke, Locke and others.

 Ingleby has pointed out to me
were published by: an anonymous writer in 1820.
was conspicuous in 1829.
truth.
profound belief in he unity of nature.
1845, 'held an opinion almost amounting to conviction, in common, I
forms under which the forces of matter are made manifest have one
mutually dependent, that they are convertible, as it were, one into
'  His own
'magnetisation of light led him directly to this belief.
date Mr.
  Colding,
relation between heat and mechanical work, and sought to determine it
  And here let me say, that to him who has only the
his soul unwarped by envy, hatred, or malice, personal or national,
  For
have been previously overlooked, he makes ready room in his
  But no retrospect of scientific
affect the positions accorded to two great Path-hewers, as the Germans
indissoluble association.
James Prescott Joule.

 Emerson, if I remember rightly,
  At a given moment
  It
of exceptional power bursts the barrier and wins a wider circle,
  But the internal
the mind finds itself surrounded by a still wider horizon.
according to Emerson, knowledge spreads by intermittent victories

When Dr.
through a height of seven hundred and seventy-two feet, generated an
Fahrenheit, and that in lifting the weight so much heat exactly
amount of scientific energy which rapidly overran a vast domain, and
Energy.
sum of power made up of items among which the most Protean
  It is as if the body of Nature
those of an organism.
change, augment and diminish, appear and disappear, while the total of
  Immutable,
gain accompanies loss, no item varying in the slightest degree without
direction.


into vapour, which rises in the air and is recondensed on mountain
  Up to
equivalent to the molecular work of vaporisation and the mechanical
the universe.
seem when mentioned to be expressed in a foreign currency.
is a loss of heat; the gain is a gain of distance, both as regards
  Water which was formerly at the sea-level has
been locked together as a liquid are now separate as vapour which can
  After condensation gravity comes into effectual play,
through their gorges to the sea.
mountain produces its definite amount of heat; every river in its
its bed.
vaporisation is accurately reversed.
loss of solar warmth with the heat generated by the condensation of

  No particle of vapour
heat; no particle returns as water to the sea without the exact
  There is nothing gratuitous in
without equivalent expenditure.
accompanies the other, leaving no nook or crevice between them for
force.

'
What has been here stated regarding heat and gravity applies to the
  Let us take an illustration from
  The metal zinc may be burnt in oxygen, a perfectly
weight of the metal.
contains a supply of oxygen--in water, for example.
this case produce flame or fire, but it does produce heat which is
  But the heat of zinc burnt in water
obtain its oxygen from the water the zinc must first dislodge the
  It is in the performance of this molecular work that the
  Mix the liberated hydrogen with oxygen and
the missing heat.
amount of heat is consumed which is accurately restored by their

This leads up to a few remarks upon the Voltaic battery.
design to dwell upon the technical features of this wonderful
given amount of energy can assume while maintaining unvarying
  When that form of power which we call an
acidulated water; and in the battery we are able so to arrange matters
  Now the
outside the battery.
of metals, or we can produce with it the dazzling electric light, and

We will now, however, content ourselves with causing the current to
redness, and finally to a white heat.
circumstances generated in the battery by the combustion of a fixed
heat generated outside.
is a maximum; if the external wire be raised to a blood-heat, the
  If the wire be
greater, and if the external wire be rendered white-hot, the defect is
  Add together the internal and external heat produced
absolutely constant total.
within, the heat generated within is so much lost without, the polar
  Thus
sum, but even the subtle agency of the electric current places no

Instead of generating external heat, we may cause the current to
  Let it,
  The heat
of a given weight of zinc falls short of what is produced when there
  How far short?  The question admits of a
  When the oxygen and hydrogen recombine, the
exactly equal in amount to that missing in the battery.
like, bottle up the gases, carry in this form the heat of the battery
  The battery, in fact is
instead of being confined in the usual manner to the hearth itself,

And here we are able to solve an enigma which long perplexed
mechanical theory of heat upon the phenomena of the Voltaic battery
  The puzzle was, that a single cell could not
  The reason is now plain enough.
equivalent of zinc in a single cell develops not much more than half
the single cell cannot cede an amount of force which it does not
  But by forming a battery of two cells instead of one, we
decomposition of the water.
enough to pay for that decomposition, and to maintain the excess

Similar reflections apply to the thermo-electric pile, an instrument
alternately together.
the soldered junctions of one face of the pile.
current, the thermo-electric current can heat wires, produce
distance from its origin.
to refer those distant manifestations of power to the heat
examination.
and six years subsequently Peltier made an observation which comes
in the formation of the thermo-electric current.
weak extraneous current was sent from antimony to bismuth the junction
from bismuth to antimony the junction was chilled.
the thermo-pile itself is always from bismuth to antimony, across the
itself without consuming the heat imparted to the junction.
is the nutriment of the current.
thermo-current in a distant wire is simply that originally imparted to
retransmuted into its first form at a distance from its origin.
water in a state of vapour passes from a boiler to a distant
so the heat communicated to the thermo-pile distils into the subtler
distant platinum wire.

a veritable perpetual motion--a machine, that is to say, which
  Let us consider the
  Suppose it to be employed to pump water
  On examining the battery which works
amount of heat.
thermal equivalent of the mechanical work performed without.
water fall again to the lower level; it is warmed by the fall.
the heat thus produced to that generated by the friction, mechanical
heat missing in the battery.
machine are thus strictly paid for; this 'payment for results' being,

No engine, however subtly devised, can evade this law of equivalence,
  The
  Is the animal body, then,
or climb a mountain, or wrestle with my comrade, am I not conscious of
of this force.
we eat.
fuel.
blood and tissue is going on.
perfectly definite amount of heat has been produced.
my biceps muscle without causing it to perform external work.
combustion is quickened, and the heat is increased; this additional
  I lay hold of a 56 lb.
weight, and by the contraction of my biceps lift it through the
  The blood and tissue consumed during this

raise the temperature of an ounce of water somewhat more than one
  I liberate the weight: it falls to the earth, and
muscle.
external space.
combustion is produced outside my body.
same as that of the Voltaic battery when it performs external work, or
  All this points to the conclusion that the
not of creative will.
be as incapable of generating energy without expenditure, as the
  The body, in other words,

We can do with the body all that we have already done with the
deflect a magnetic needle.
produce all these effects, as the combustion of zinc may be caused to
  By turning the handle of a magneto-electric machine a
 As
overcome the ordinary inertia and friction of the machine in turning
  But the moment the two ends of the coil are united by a
turning arm.
immediately appears.
  You can readily
  This is a very
  From the muscles of the arm, with a temperature of
nearly four thousand degrees.
of the burning bush mentioned in Exodus.
was not consumed--here the body is consumed, but does not burn.
similarity of the action with that of the Voltaic battery when it
  When the
of the battery, is consumed in molecular work, being fully restored
  As before, also, the transmuted heat of
restored to its pristine form.


us; and here we find the forces of the human body identical with those
  Just as little as the Voltaic battery is the
  It is an apparatus exquisite and
energy with which it is supplied, but it possesses no creative power.
Compared with the notions previously entertained regarding the play of
  The problem of vital dynamics
'
first successfully grappled with the problem.
sense of being infallible, but he was a man of genius whose work will
in connection with our illustrious countryman Dr.
  Other
all that has been done hitherto enhances instead of diminishing the
 Mayer.

  'Beyond the power of generating
itself.
friction can heat wood to its point of ignition.
abandon the physiological axiom that the animal body cannot create
total heat, within and without, that ought to be regarded as the real
'  Mayer, however,
transfer of muscular heat to external space.
velocity of 30 feet to an 8-lb.
1 of a
  The heat of the muscle is here distributed over the
  A
 consumes in lifting his own body to a height of
  Jumping from this height the
  The consumption of 2 oz.
  20 grs.
would place the same man on the summit of a mountain 10,000 feet high.
In descending the mountain an amount of heat equal to that produced by
  The
 weigh 64 lbs.
dried they are reduced to 15 lbs.
a day-labourer's ordinary work exerted on the muscles alone, they
  Were the oxidation necessary to
be consumed in 8 days.
ventricles, their action would consume the associated muscular tissue
  With a fulness and precision of which this is but a
of vital dynamics.

of that day, with Liebig at their head, this solitary Heilbronn worker
played the part of machinery, converting the fat, which had been
the organism.
scientific world is now upon his side.

 It
fluid is poured into the blood.
atmospheric oxygen admitted by the lungs.
as wood or coal might unite with it in a furnace.
of the union, if I may use the term, are the same in both cases, viz.
carbonic acid and water.
within the body, or heat and work outside the body.
action of the organism belongs to the domain either of physics or of
  But you saw me contract the muscle of my arm.
enabled me to do, so?  Was it or was it not the direct action of my

whitish filaments of medullary matter, which issue from the spinal
the other side losing themselves in the muscles.
cords are the nerves, which you know are divided into two kinds,
efferent nerves.
to the brain; the latter convey the behests of the brain to the
  Here, as elsewhere, we find ourselves aided by the sagacity
the nerves in the organism.
nor both together, possessed the energy necessary to animal motion;
which floods of energy are let loose.
admirable lucidity, 'by the motion of his finger in opening a valve or
infinite compared with its exciting cause; so the nerves, acting on
the work done by the nerves themselves.
Mayer, pull the trigger, but the gunpowder which they ignite is stored
  This is the view now universally entertained.

that any measurable time elapsed between the infliction of a wound and
thirty years ago.
Haller, were thought to be transmitted, if not instantaneously, at all
  Hence, when Helmholtz, in
be a comparatively sluggish process, very few believed him.
experiments may now be made in the lecture-room.

moves at the rate of 5,000 feet a second; light in aether moves at the
probably at the same rate.
the rate of only 70 feet a second, a progress which in these quick

Your townsman, Mr.
antimony which exhibits an action strikingly analogous to that of
  A rod of this antimony is in such a molecular
disturbance propagates itself before your eyes to the other end, the
heat and fumes along the line of propagation.
molecules of the nerves are successively overthrown; and if Mr.
could only devise some means of winding up his exhausted antimony, as
complete.
it up, by reference to the case of a whale struck by a harpoon in the
  If the animal were 70 feet long, a second would elapse before
  But the impression after its
condition necessary to consciousness.
command to the tail to defend itself is shot through the motor nerves.
Another second must elapse before the command can reach the tail, so
wound and the muscular response of the part wounded.
required for the kindling of consciousness would probably more than
rifle-bullet.
be destroyed, and in such a case we may safely conclude that death is

*****
The experiences of common life supply us with copious instances of the
'priming' of the muscles by the nerves.
produced on a 'nervous' organisation by a slight sound which causes
  An aërial wave, the energy of which would not reach a
through the thousandth of an inch, can throw the whole human frame
palpitation.
ear.
illustration:
A merchant sits complacently in his easy chair, not knowing whether
occupies the largest portion of his personality.
room with a telegram bearing the words, 'Antwerp, &c.
.
and Co.
' 'Tell James to harness the horses!' The servant
  Upstairs the merchant, wide awake; makes a dozen paces through
forwards despatches.
and their driver is immediately at the Bank, on the Bourse, and among
  Before an hour has elapsed he is again at
deep-drawn sigh, 'Thank God I am protected against the worst, and now
'
This complex mass of action, emotional, intellectual, and mechanical,
light coming from a few pencil marks on a bit of paper.
Lange says, terror, hope, sensation, calculation, possible ruin, and
  What caused the merchant to spring
  What made his
latch, and liberated the muscular power.
the centre of the nervous system.
This is the critical question, to which some will reply that it had

The aim and effort of science is to explain the unknown in terms of
  Explanation, therefore, is conditioned by knowledge.
have probably heard the story of the German peasant, who, in early
  He
  Every
could not be invoked.
possible escape from the conclusion, he exclaimed confidently to his
inside.
deep-lying truth.

upon me such considerations as these: Your motor nerves are so many
world; and your sensor nerves are so many conduits through which the
  But you have not told
  Who or what is it that sends and receives those
the existence of a self within the self, which acts through the body
muscles as hearkening to the commands sent through the motor nerves,
intelligence; are you not bound to supplement this mechanism by the
forced by Tour own exposition into the hypothesis of a free human

knowledge, it might well have been deemed conclusive.
reflection, however, shows that instead of introducing light into our
darkness.
known, which, as stated above, is the method of science, but you
  Try to mentally
difficulty immediately appears.
are warranted in stating is that the terror, hope, sensation, and
or associated with, the molecular processes set up by waves of light

When facts present themselves let us dare to face them, but let the

subjective--between molecular motions and states of consciousness? My
who does.

are two sides of one and the same phenomenon.
phenomenon have two sides?  This is the very core of the difficulty.
There are plenty of molecular motions which do not exhibit this
  Does water think or feel when it runs into frost-ferns
brain be yoked to this mysterious companion--consciousness?  We can
brain, the thrilling of the nerves, the discharging of the muscles,
  But we can
emerges, either as a necessary link or as an accidental by-product of
  Yet it certainly does emerge--the prick of a

equally unpresentable to the mind.
boundary line of the intellect, where the ordinary canons of science
  If we are true to these
processes.
one to the other, we meet a blank which mechanical deduction is unable
  Frankly stated, we have here to deal with facts almost as
  And if you are
refuses the yoke of ordinary physical laws, I, for one, would not
  Amid all our speculative
day; namely, that the brightness and the usefulness of life, as well
use or abuse of this miraculous organ.

'poetic rendering' branded as a 'falsehood' and a 'fib.
vituperation is unmerited, for poetry or ideality, and untruth are
  The one may vivify, while the other,
  When St.
in the blood of Christ' does he 'fib'?  Indeed, if the appeal to
censure.
 'How can this man give us his flesh to
  Such are
  Cardinal Manning would doubtless tell any
'fibs' away the plain words of his Saviour when he reduces 'the Body

Though misuse may render it grotesque or insincere, the idealisation
my opinion, an important future.
our historic ancestors, and any feeling which affected them
  The
metaphysic will be welcomed when it abandons its pretensions to
 'A

figure.
  They
last a hundred years.
'
mutation.
 They will
  Such ideas constitute a
the physical universe, of assuming various shapes and undergoing
  They baffle and elude the theological
  They offer
function is, or ought to be, to find 'local habitation' for thoughts
defined.


  It is this: Are the
with the brain--and, as far as our experience goes, indissolubly
nature?  Is the will of man, in other words, free, or are it and
after he had established it to the entire satisfaction of his
  You will
entitled 'Die Bestimmung des Menschen'--The Vocation of Man.
[Footnote: Translated by Dr.
1873.
but the price he paid for it indicates the difficulty of the task.
escape from the iron necessity seen everywhere reigning in physical
both of them to be the products of his own mind.
be the slave of a thing which he had himself created.
deal to be said in favour of this view, but few of us probably would
Fichte melted his chains.

do not fear it at all?  Has not Carlyle somewhere said that a belief
Fichte, 'it is Freedom itself, by which the greatest and most
  Man is the
' But the question of moral responsibility here
so many of us dread.
frighten Bishop Butler.
not fear its practical consequences.
the 'Analogy,' that as far as human conduct is concerned, the two

What is meant by free-will?  Does it imply the power of producing
tour of occurrences without any impulse from within or from without?
  If there be absolutely or relatively no
absolutely or relatively no reason why a man should act, he will not
  It is true that the united voice of this assembly could not
if I wished to do so.
will cannot be questioned.
Are we, or are we not, complete masters of the circumstances which
reflection will, I think, prove that we are not.
have I had to do with the generation and development of that which
my total being--the living, speaking organism which now addresses you?
intellectual textures were woven for me, not by me.
conduct or regulation of which I had no share have made me what I am.
Here, surely, if anywhere, we are as clay in the hands of the potter.
It is the greatest of delusions to suppose that we come into this
likes, making us good or bad, noble or mean, as the age pleases.
age can stunt, promote, or pervert pre-existent capacities, but it
  The worthy Robert Owen, who saw in external
supplement his doctrine by making the man himself one of the
  It is as fatal as it is cowardly to blink facts
  How many disorders, ghostly and
whenever it is a question whether a crime has been committed under the
is derived from the parental antecedents of the accused.
these insanity be exhibited in any marked degree, the presumption in
of life has taught both judge and jury that insanity is frequently

I met, some years ago, in a railway carriage the governor of one of
  He was evidently an observant and reflective
world, and a thorough student of the duties of his vocation.
me that the prisoners in his charge might be divided into three
  The first class consisted of persons who ought
  External accident, and not internal
happened to them might happen to most of us.
men of sound moral stamina, though wearing the prison garb.
the largest class, formed of individuals possessing no strong bias,
mould them into either good or evil members of society.
a class--happily not a large one--whom no kindness could conciliate
  They were sent into this world labelled
organisations.
be faced.
certainly not the proper place.
should be on a desert island where the deadly _contagium_ of their
  But the sea itself he was
island.
prisoners of the first class were liberated; prisoners of the second
under water.

argument against 'free-will,' as commonly understood, derives its
  It is, as already hinted, indefinitely strengthened
  Most of you have been forced to listen to
for some years after the publication of Mr.
Species.
settled down in the belief that Mr.
truth of nature: that we who are now 'foremost in the files of time'
lower to higher forms of life.

the aeons across which life has crept towards its present outcome, his
progenitors of this assembly could not be called human.
humble society, through the interaction of its members and the storing
better still; until at length, by the integration of infinitesimals
  We of
and beneficent result.
just as little share.
excellence constitutes our present store owed their advantages, first,
and, secondly, to a law of heredity in the passing of which our
  With characteristic felicity and
 Matthew Arnold lifts this question into the free air of
process of amelioration to 'a power not ourselves which makes for
'  If, then, our organisms, with all their tendencies
while capable of acting within certain limits in accordance with our
wishes originate; if, finally, our motives and wishes determine our
free-will?
*****
Here, again, we are confronted with the question of moral
desirable to meet.
back into the condition of 'the ape and tiger,' so sedulously excited
rudest form, and in the most uncompromising way.
robber, the ravisher, or the murderer, 'I act because I must act, what
'The right of society to protect itself against aggressive and
forces of man.
what I cannot help.
known that the treadmill or the gallows was certainly in store for
"  Let us reason the matter fully and
  We may entertain no malice or hatred against you; it is
determined that you and such as you shall not enjoy liberty of evil
 You, who have behaved as a wild beast, we claim
 The public safety
moral renovation, while the knowledge that you have been hanged by the
motive which will hold them back.
minor penalty, then not only others, but yourself, may profit by the
  On the homely principle that "a burnt
on a repetition of your crime.
our conduct.
to the public detriment.
help punishing, for the public good.
Butler predicted, we act as the world acted when it supposed the evil
' [Footnote:
'truculent logic.
consideration.

if a man's predetermined position in the moral world renders him
The preacher's last word is a factor in the man's conduct, and it may
otherwise remain imprisoned and unused.
feel that words of enlightenment, courage, and admonition enter into
since she gifted man with speech, he will suffer no paralysis to fall
  Dung the fig-tree hopefully, and not until its
forth, 'Cut it down, why cumbereth it the ground?'
I remember when a youth in the town of Halifax, some two-and-thirty
select audience.
practical, and his voice soon rivetted attention.
defining it as a debt owed, and there was a kindling vigour in his
those who heard him.
will could alter the fact that the words of that young man did me
  His name was George Dawson.
me to allude to it, of a social subject much discussed at the
' Suppose, he says, two men
sleeps till nine next morning, what becomes of your levelling?  And in
have seen, secures advance, not by the reduction of all to a common

It may be urged that, in dealing as above with my hypothetical
influence of religions which include the dogmas of theology and the
and keep in awe an immoral minority.
above all things, and desperately wicked.
theologic sanctions, including the belief in free-will, and the
wickedness which have been above adduced.
become robbers, and ravishers, and murderers.
written of late it would seem that this astounding inference finds
  Possibly, the people who hold such views

    The fear of hell's a hangman's whip,

Remove the fear, and the wretch, following his natural instinct, may

ethical consequence of a rejection of dogma.
of George Jacob Holyoake is doubtless familiar, and you are probably
frequently pelted.
completely liberated themselves from theologic notions.
working-class politicians Mr.
  Does he exhort
  In
words from his pen: 'The gospel of dirt is bad enough, but the gospel
' He contemptuously calls the
trencher.
the dignity and power of self-help' higher than 'any prospect of a
' Such is the moral doctrine taught by this
it.

may use the term, shed by religion on the minds and lives of many
  At the same time I cannot but observe how
fails in other cases.
bottom a brawler and a clown.
distinctions of character which religion does not remove.
comfort some to know that there are amongst us many whom the
whose lives, nevertheless, as tested by any accessible standard of
who seek to stamp them with this offensive brand.
'offensive,' I refer simply to the intention of those who use such
of the notions ventilated in the columns of religious newspapers, has
  If I wished to find men who are
bond, and to whom moral shiftiness of any kind is subjectively
honourable neighbour, and a just citizen--I should seek him, and find
  I have known some
them approaching with open eyes the inexorable goal, with no dread of
mindful of their duties, and as faithful in the discharge of them, as

In letters addressed to myself, and in utterances addressed to the
religious faith with moral elevation.
for fourteen or fifteen years of my life, and had thus occasion to
extravagance, be called perfection.
impetuous but self-restrained; a sweet and lofty courtesy marked his
people, a nature so fine might well have been distilled from the
  Not only in its broader sense was the
many would call the narrow sense held by those described by Faraday
known at all, as Sandemanians,' it constituted the light and comfort

Were our experience confined to such cases, it would furnish an
religion with moral purity and grace.
experience is not thus confined.
point, we may compare with Faraday a philosopher of equal magnitude,
simplicity, intellectual power and moral elevation, singularly
the theologic views nor the religious emotions which formed so
  I allude to Mr.
the Abraham of scientific men--a searcher as obedient to the command
  I cannot
the exclusive source of qualities shared so conspicuously by one
  To a deeper virtue belonging to human
both.

incongruous with intelligence.
superstition has unquestionably constrained its subjects to abandon
loss accompanying its decay at the present day has been thus clearly
not proceed from the priests themselves--whose grief at the loss of
the politicians, the whole matter resolves itself into this, that
  The judge
threats of relentless damnation, he could compel the accused to make
  The evil spirit formerly performed without reward
paid.

thoroughly than this powerful and fervid teacher, who, by the way, did
' But Fichte asserted emphatically
  'Let us
of religion--I mean pure morality.
duty in his breast absolutely, because it is a law unto him; and he
duty.
obedience, without regard for consequences, and without desire for
'
  Faraday was equally distinct.
intention,' he says, 'of substituting anything for religion, but I

society, are independent of religion and may exist without it.
were the words of his youth, but they expressed his latest
  I would add, that the muse of Tennyson never reached a

    Were wisdom in the scorn of consequence.

human nature been built up.
has worked with stern tools upon a very rigid stuff.
cannot be so readily undone; and it has endowed us with moral
true, just as surely as it has endowed us with sentient organisms,
  That power did not work with
  Facts,
and cold, pleasure and pain, fervour, sympathy, aspiration, shame,
and adjustment throughout an immeasurable past wove the triplex web of
forces that will be effectual to the end.

righteousness' has dealt in delusions; for it cannot be denied that
freedom of the will, have had some effect in moulding the moral world.
Granted; but I do not think that this goes to the root of the matter.
Are you quite sure that those beliefs and dogmas are primary, and not
creators, of man's moral nature?  I think it is in one of the
nobility of man from a belief in heaven, by telling him that he puts
heaven is derived from the nobility of man.
weave its nest is referred to by Emerson as typical of the force which

    Of leaves and feathers from her breast,
    Painting with morn each annual cell?
    While love and terror laid the tiles;
    As the best gem upon her zone;
    To gaze upon the Pyramids;
    As on its friends with kindred eye;
    These wonders rose to upper air,
    Adopted them into her race,
    With Andes and with Ararat.

to be interpreted as aspirations, or, as having their roots in
  Does the song of the
goodwill toward men,' express the exaltation and the yearning of a
visible host and an audible song?  If the former, the exaltation and
confined to individuals, but which may by-and-by become the leaven of
  If the latter, then belief in the entire transaction is
  Look to the East at the present moment as

centuries, and in that ruin is involved the claim of the 'heavenly
  But though the mechanical theory proves
ours, to be incorporated, let us hope, in purer and less shadowy forms

Thus, following the lead of physical science, we are brought without
classified, lie entirely outside the domain of physics.
problems thoughtful and penetrative minds are now applying those
by their fruits.
the supernatural in accounting for the phenomena of human life; and
favour of any other origin, are driven to seek in the interaction of
  If
succeed--social duty will be raised to a higher level of significance
lessen, if not obliterate, the strifes and heartburnings which now
  Towards this great end it
I have the honour, ladies and gentlemen, to bid you a friendly



********************
XV.

THIS world of ours has, on the whole, been an inclement region for the
hardier for the bendings and buffetings it has undergone.
torturing of a shrub, within certain limits, strengthens it.
the struggles and passions of the brute, man reaches his estate;
and persecution his knowledge of nature, including that of his own
  The bias towards natural truth must have been strong to have
  Feeling appeared in the
on emotion, had, before the dawn of science, taken root in man.
thoughts, conceptions, and creeds must have met a deep and general
their abiding power so strong.
ideal and wonderful--led eventually to the differentiation of a caste,
surroundings, and to give shape, name, and habitation to the emotions
  Even the savage lived, not by bread
capacities and needs.
opened out into civilised man--these forms were purified and ennobled

    Wound itself lovingly around the Truth.


    Sich noch lieblich um die Wahrheit wand.
]
As poets, the priesthood would have been justified, their deities,
more or less legitimate symbols and personifications of the aspects of
  The priests, however, or
validity for their conceptions, and tried to base upon external

into the region of fact and positive knowledge of conceptions
unconsciously, wages war.
any other part of human consciousness; and against it, on its
  But when,
inaccurate historic data, and moulded by misapplied logic, this
as in duty bound, stands as a hostile power in its path.
against the mythologic scenery, if I may use the term, rather than
protest.
taken for what it is worth--as an effort on the part of man to bring
a temporary and essentially fluxional rendering in terms of knowledge
approach.

  It is, for
 Matthew Arnold to protect, amid the
  And it is to be
accessible truth.
at work.

other free utterances, we have this one: 'If matter is not eternal,
dwindle into absolute insignificance.
out, the process is unthinkable; the sudden apocalypse of a material
Knight will have to reckon with the English Marriage Service, one of
all things of nothing.
"without form and void" of life, is merely a poetic rendering of the
' These are all bold words to be spoken
I have underlined show a remarkable freedom of dealing with the sacred
  They repeat in terser language what I ventured to utter four
 'Profoundly interesting and
appease its hunger for a Cause.
in scientific questions.
_  In
and it will continue to be, purely obstructive and hurtful.
agreement with Professor Knight extends still further.
vital,' he asks, 'proceed by a still remoter development from the
emphasises his question--'has it always existed in some form or other
'how we can escape from the last alternative.
my conviction I say, Nor do I, though our modes of regarding the

When matter was defined by Descartes, he deliberately excluded the

  And, inasmuch as the impotence
referred to an external cause.
the impulse.
Thoughts' will occur to most readers:
    Who Motion foreign to the smallest grain
    Who bid brute Matter's restive lump assume

ashes lie unmarked in Putney Churchyard, strenuously contended.
affirmed motion to be an inherent attribute of matter--that no portion
animated by a motion of their ultimate particles.
contention, according to the learned and laborious Dr.
[Footnote: 'John Toland und der Monismus der Gegenwart,' Heidelberg,
] entitles Toland to be regarded as the founder of that

It seems to me that the idea of vitality entertained in our day by
his opponents in Toland's day.
be a thing sui generis, distinct from matter, and incapable of being
  Hence the obvious inference when matter was
  It was the vehicle of an energy not its own--the
recipient of the shock of the Divine.
the subject-matter is changed.
Professor Knight, 'may be a fact; a daily and hourly apocalypse.
we have no evidence of the non-vital passing into the vital.
Spontaneous generation is, as yet, an imaginative guess, unverified by
  And matter is not itself alive.
seen in a single cell of protoplasm or in the human brain, is a thing
out of matter.
will follow the example of motion, and, after the necessary antecedent
mother' who has been so often misdefined.

an axiomatic truth.
entertained by the philosopher Ueberweg, one of the subtlest heads
  'What occurs in the brain' says Ueberweg
appears in its greatest concentration did not obtain generally, only
  Take a pair of mice and a cask of
  By copious nourishment the animals increase and multiply, and
  The quantity
among their descendants, for in that case the last must feel more
 The sensations and feelings must necessarily be
true, and not concentrated as they are in the brain.
Letter to Lange: 'Geschichte des Materialismus,' zweite Aufl,
 ii.
 521.
tub of fermented cherries, but by distillation we obtain from them
  Hence Ueberweg's comparison of the brain
pre-existing, but diluted in the food.

 Holyoake, [Footnote: 'Nineteenth Century,'
] 'grow as the horizon of experience expands.
are not inventions, but descriptions of the state of a question.
man sees all through a discovery at once.
matter, and his explanation of motion, would be put aside as trivial
  They are
  And yet a desire
conceptions which passed muster in the infancy of knowledge, but which
  Mr.
Martineau, I think, errs when he seeks to hold me to views enunciated
' That definitions should change
scientific practice.
started, it was not imagined that the vibrations of light could be
  The example of sound was
  Now the
light involved a radical change of conception as to the mechanical
  But though this change went so
solid, rather than those of a gas, the change was accepted, because
  Following Mr.
Martineau's example, the opponent of the undulatory theory might
  'This
of service.
cover its bones, it turns up as a prince when large undertakings are
  You had some show of reason when, with the case of sound
of attenuation.
facts, you drop the beggar's rags, and accomplish an undertaking,
only planets of enormous weight, but comets with hardly any weight at
motion.

 Martineau's contention that we are
our notions of matter.

well as his insight.
morality involved in the decay of religious belief.
 Knight
  'I
derived as well as developed, its present decisions would not be
  The child of experience has a father whose teachings are
stringent as any derived from a celestial source.
follow that a belief in the material origin of spiritual existence,
necessarily lead to a relaxation of the moral fibre of the race.
[Footnote: Is this really certain?  Instead of standing in the
merely coexistent, both, perhaps, flowing from common historic
  But it is
communities, in which the absence of the latter belief has neither
' I have
lofty in thought and beneficent in act--belong to a class who
  They derive from it
in quest of persons who, in regard to the finer endowments of human
characteristic samples among the noisier defenders of the orthodox
  These, however, are but 'hand-specimens' on both sides; the
welcome corroboration of my experience.
Professor Blackie, describes Buddha as being 'a great deal more than a
incarnation of moral perfection.
Atheism,' p.
]  And yet, 'what Buddha preached was a gospel of
Trinity, but even from the existence of God.
History of Atheism,' p.
]  These civilised and gallant voices
sometimes come to us along the same meridian.


boyhood fond of play and physical action, but averse to schoolwork,
  The aversion did not arise from intellectual apathy
earliest teachers lacked the power of imparting vitality to what they
  Athwart all play and amusement, however, a thread of
childhood has been passed, fretted by the question 'Who made God?'  I
by that love to commit large portions of it to memory.
became adroit in turning my Scriptural knowledge against the Church of
a time the limits of enquiry.
example, as enunciated in the Athanasian Creed, perplexed me.
resurrection of the body was also a thorn in my mind, and here I

                    Sure the same power
    Can reassemble the loose, scatter'd parts

The conclusion seemed for the moment entirely fair, but with further
  I had seen cows and sheep
of dead men.
modification of human flesh, and the persons who fed upon them were as
substance.
one body and afterwards to a different one, and I asked myself how two
resurrection.
set as they were.
possibly enter into the composition of the other?  Omnipotence itself,
  Thus the plank
momentarily into sight, disappeared, and I was again cast abroad on

At the same time I could by no means get rid of the idea that the
of a power altogether beyond my grasp--an energy the thought of which
personal or otherwise, from the intellect.
of the 'Saturday Review' are justified in speaking as they sometimes
 Carlyle.
the fact in their own way.
also in honour bound to acknowledge the debt.
privileged to come into contact with that illustrious man have shown
more frequently withstood him.
bottom always was that the human soul has claims and yearnings which
  England to come will assuredly thank

referred to was indefinitely strengthened, my whole life being at the
writings of Carlyle.
  Emerson
 [Footnote:
the 'Characteristics of the Present Age' a sample of the vital power
]  In this relation I cared little for political
life and strength of pure and powerful minds.
school-days, under a clever teacher, some knowledge of mathematics and
I resolved to augment it.
whether mathematics and physics could help me in other spheres, rather
I ventured, in 1848, to break the continuity of my life, and devote
Germany.

  To carry it duly
  There was
  The
followed the truth as it is in nature; and in doing so had often
  Among
as much insisted on as it could be among theologians.
they had not the rewards or penalties of the theologian to offer to
assuming, that those whom they addressed had that within them which
  If Germany should ever change for
which in those days characterised her teachers, and through them her
  Such a
without their standing to each other in the relation of cause and

My first really laborious investigation, conducted jointly with my
with my speculative tastes.
molecular physics, having reference to the curious, and then
the magnetic field.
magnetism in its twofold aspect of an attractive and a repellent
  Iron was attracted by a magnet, bismuth was repelled, and the
  Faraday
the aid of new forces to account for the phenomena.
however, found that the displacement in a crystal of an atom of the
crystalline form, produced a complete reversal of the phenomena.
lines through the crystal which were in the one case drawn towards the

magne-crystallic action was proved to be due, not to the operation of
arrangement.
was in those days a subject of the most lively contention.
finally proved to be so; and the most complicated cases of
consequences of the principle of diamagnetic polarity.
researches, which occupied in all five years of my life, and
incessant subject of mental contemplation, gave a tinge and bias to my
my subsequent enquiries.
the subject of radiation, heat and light were handled throughout by
perchance lay hold upon the ultimate particles of matter.

interact--the strengthening of the mind by exercise, and the
  There seems no limit to the
its train.
that subsensible world into which all natural phenomena strike their
  By it we are enabled to
beyond the range of the senses, and to apply to them reasoning as
collisions of sensible masses.
conceptions, there is a risk of being irresistibly led beyond the
  Even in those early stages of scientific
crystals, but organic structures, the body of man inclusive, as cases
those of inorganic nature, but reducible, in the long run, to the same
  In ancient journals I find recorded ponderings and
reference to magnetic and crystalline phenomena, to present some
are built up.
early speculations, already possibly known to a few of my readers, but
occupied.


 Rebus under the
current of our thoughts and conversation was substantially this: We
  In opposition to gravity its molecules
leaves.
an inherent force?  Science rejects the outside builder; let us,
present year.
the vegetable world.
the cloud-screen which our atmosphere had drawn between him and us was
  But what is
was a silver birch, with its leaves rapidly quivering in the morning
  We had here motion, but not the motion of life.
as a mass under the influence of an outside force, while the motion of
  How are we to figure this molecular
them?  Suppose the leaves to be shaken from the tree and enabled to
  To fix the ideas, suppose the point of
the root of each leaf to repel all other roots, but to attract the
  The leaves would then resemble an assemblage of little
  In
positions of rest, forming a coherent mass.
breeze, which now causes them to quiver, to disturb the assumed
  As often as disturbed there would be a constant effort
effort the mass of leaves would pass through different shapes and
  If other leaves, moreover, were at hand endowed with similar
leaves being the consequence.

matter--the atoms and molecules of which it is made up--are endowed

conception of molecular polarity.
the molecules of a seed, like our fallen leaves in the first instance,
an external impulse.
waves through space, are the great agents of molecular disturbance.
the inert molecules of seed and soil these waves impinge, disturbing

in--is incessantly renewed; in the molecular struggle matter is
obedience to the forces which guide the molecules, into the special
  In a general way, therefore, the life of the tree
equilibrium.
structural effort; we have here the earliest groping of the so-called
animals, though, as already stated, indefinitely more complex, are to
building of the crystal.

the plant the flower, the flower again the seed, the causal line,
of departure.
know--science fails even to inform us whether it was ever 'planned' at
  Yonder butterfly has a spot of orange on its wing; and if we
butterfly, we probably find the selfsame spot upon the wing.
century the molecules have described their cycles.
been begotten, have been born, and have died; still we find the
  Who or what determined this
intellectual range when we say that there is probably nothing in that
involved in its construction are qualitatively the same as those
  We may even
his reason--without which he can neither think nor feel, is also an
  Here,
if asked to deduce from the physical interaction of the brain
acknowledge my helplessness.
of the brain may be as certain as the association of light with the
  But whereas in the latter case we have unbroken
case logical continuity disappears.
consciousness is interposed a fissure over which the ladder of
  We must, therefore,
able to bring it under the yoke of _à priori_ deduction.


days of my scientific youth.
determination to push physical considerations to their utmost
do not lead to the final explanation of all that we feel and know.
This acknowledgment, be it said in passing, was by no means made with
physical.
manifests itself in the following extract from an article entitled
August 4, 1860:
'The philosophy of the future will assuredly take more account than
processes; and it may be that the qualities of the mind will be
a force through the affections of ordinary matter.
every thought and every feeling has its definite mechanical
remarshalling of the atoms of the brain.
purely physical; and were the faculties we now possess sufficiently
be within the range of our augmented powers to infer from the
it, and, conversely, to infer from the thought the exact molecular
  We do not say--and this, as will be seen, is
priori_ one.
of the brain and the associated mental affections, both might be so
the table would declare the other.
shrivel into nothingness when brought to bear on such a problem, but

related, that a mere expansion of the latter would enable them to cope
  Why, then, in scientific speculation should we turn
coming--ages no doubt distant, but still advancing--when the dwellers
a rudiment, may be able to apply to these mighty questions faculties
present senses and intelligence of man--given also the time necessary
  Development
  There need be
yet to come.

from material combinations and arrangements would be an inference _à
  The inference meant would be the same in kind as that which
enable us to make, differing only from the latter in the degree of
  Given the masses and
their mutual attractions.
air, or aether--knowing the physical qualities of the medium we can
  In all this we deal with
  The mind runs with certainty along the line of thought
break in the chain.
process from the phenomena of physics to those of thought, we meet a
we now possess.
eludes all intellectual presentation.
with the Incomprehensible.
has its limits from which we look with vacant gaze into the region
  Let us follow matter to its utmost bounds, let us claim it in
himself--as ours to experiment with and to speculate upon.
the term "vital force" from our vocabulary, let us reduce, if we can,
repulsions.
mighty Mystery still looms beyond us.
towards its solution.
philosophies of successive ages to confess that
                          "We are such stuff
    Is rounded by a sleep.

since, I employ the precise language thus extracted from the 'Saturday
'
The distinction is here clearly brought out which I had resolved at
know, and what they could never hope to know.
magnifying power to our present vision, and the atomic motions of the
  Compare these motions with
might be established; but 'we try to soar in a vacuum when we
'
mechanical treatment.
consciousness from motion as we deduce one motion from another.
Nevertheless observation is open to us, and by it relations may be
reason.
datum into an inference--an ultimate fact into a product of logic.
desire for the moment, however, is not to theorise, but to let facts

The most 'materialistic' speculation for which I was responsible,
from a brief article written as far back as 1865: 'Supposing the
renewing a pre-existing form, to be gathered first-hand from nature,
body.
forces, the same motions and distribution of motions--would this
thinking being?  There seems no valid reason to assume that it would
  Or supposing a planet carved from the sun, set spinning round an
our earth, would one consequence of the refrigeration of the mass be
' This is
' An opinion is
'
The burthen of my writings in this connection is as much a recognition
  In 1867,
for freedom of investigation; while considering science to be alike
to the material wants of men; if asked whether science has solved, or
shake my head in doubt.
instrument with a certain range of notes, beyond which in both
  The phenomena of matter and force
us the real mystery of the universe lies unsolved, and, as far as we

While refreshing my mind on these old themes I appear to myself as a
weary of repeating it.
grandeur and the littleness of man--the vastness of his range in some
in others.
the British Association, then assembled at Norwich, I repeat the same

thought as exercised by us to have its correlative in the physics of
is tenable, is stated.
to maintain this position against all attacks, but I do not think he
  The problem of the connection of body and soul is

writer has exclaimed, "Ohne Phosphor kein Gedanke!" That may or may
would not lighten our darkness.
assigned to the materialist, he is equally helpless.
whence is this "matter" of which we have been discoursing--who or what
running into organic forms--he has no answer.
regard to such questions.
science is rendered dumb, who else is prepared with an answer?  Let us
one and all.


Virchow at Munich on September 22, 1877, was long and loud.
'Times' published a nearly full translation of the lecture, and it was
  Glances from it to an Address
and published in this volume, were very frequent.
was held up to me in some quarters as a model of philosophic caution,
reproved my shallowness.
sedulously emptied, not only of the 'principles of scientific
' And though I am
Century' for April the public mind in this connection from heated
Virchow's views, and of my relation to them, will be out of place

The key-note of his position is struck in the preface to the excellent
himself.
wish to disparage the great services rendered by Mr.
advancement of biological science, of which no one has expressed more
  On the other hand, it seemed high time to
to proclaim the problems of research as actual facts, and the opinions
' On the ground, among others,
considers the theory of evolution dangerous; but his fidelity to truth
were only proved.
let the confederates be as mischievous as they might, still I do not
the evolution theory was a perfectly established doctrine--so certain
it is"--from that moment we could not dare to feel any scruple about
to every educated man, but to impart it to every child, to make it the
and to base upon it our whole system of education.
a necessity.

'we' in the first sentence of the foregoing quotation.
Professor Haeckel would accept this canon in all its fulness, and
  He would say without hesitation: 'I am
doctrine, and hence on your own showing I am justified in urging its
' It is plain, however, that Professor
  His 'we' must cover
  It would probably cover more
if every one of his hearers accepted the theory of evolution, that
large.
  If he means that the
experts are agreed as to its truth, but when the community is prepared
matter of social policy, Dr.
antedate the period of its introduction.
community great changes must have timeliness as well as truth upon
  But if the mouths of thinkers be stopped, the necessary
established between the expert and the public, and the slow and
discussion will be displaced by something far less safe and salutary.

marked distinction ought to be made between that which is
speculation.

of day, to any such absurdity.
put on the same evidential level as the former.
poetically expresses it, I to be written in small letters under the
' The audience ought to be warned that the speculative matter is
'belief,' and not to that of demonstration.
continues in this speculative stage it would be mischievous, he
 'We ought not,' he urges, 'to
doctrine: this is inadmissible.
physical processes and mental phenomena he says: 'I will, indeed,
points at which we trace a passage from mental processes to processes
  Throughout this
psychical processes into an immediate connection with those that are
  All I say is that we have _at present_ no right to set up
' In the next
introduction of such topics into school teaching.
says, 'a strict distinction between what we wish to _teach_, and what we
  The objects of our research are expressed as
  _We need not keep them to ourselves; we are
problem; that is what we strive for.
.
 The investigation of such
restricted to any one.
  But the problem
doctrine_.
 Haeckel 'that it is a question
descent should be at once laid down as the basis of instruction, and
concerning spiritual being.
'With perfect truth did Bacon say of old "_Scientia est potentia_.
he also defined that knowledge; and the knowledge he meant was not
objective and actual knowledge.
abusing our power, we should be imperilling our power, unless in our
domain.
problems_, and I am sure that every venture of that kind will then find
' I have emphasised by italics two
the author's own.

than he has here made it himself.
practical importance.
says, men are busied in renovating, extending, and developing the
it.
education.
new educational establishments are set up, the universities are
  Finally comes
Virchow thinks it ought and ought not to be, is disclosed by the
  There ought to be a clear distinction made
of fact.
  And, as
exclusion ought, he thinks, to fall upon the theory of evolution.


is here laid down.
the introduction of the theory of evolution into our schools.
should even be disposed to resist its introduction before its meaning
it is now by the great body of the community.
think, to bide its time until the free conflict of discovery,
  A necessary
prevented, either by the ferocity of reviewers or the arm of the law;
on.
the side of Virchow.

occupy in London for more than a quarter of a century, and which never
evolution, I have had the honour of addressing audiences in Liverpool,
evolution, and the connected doctrine of spontaneous generation, have
  Let us now examine whether in my

In the Liverpool discourse, after speaking of the theory of evolution
'the dim twilight of conjecture,' and affirming that 'the certainty
as enunciated by Kant and Laplace, and afterwards proceed thus:
probable_, a desire immediately arises to connect the present life of
 We wish to know something of our remotest
  On its first detachment from the sun, life, as we
  How, then,
freedom--a freedom preceded by the hard discipline which checks
in science and out of it, is dogmatism.
the meeting, willing to end but ready to go on.
intrude upon you unasked the unformed notions which are floating like
speculative mind_.

  Those who hold
of their data, and they only yield to it a provisional assent_.
regard the nebular hypothesis as probable; and, in the utter absence
nature from the present into the past.
nature is their only guide.
curve in a world of observation and experiment, they prolong that
sequence of development from the nebula to the present time.
appears that, long antecedent to the publication of his advice, I did
as he could be not to claim for a scientific doctrine a certainty

I now pass on to the Belfast Address, and will cite at once from it

where our microscopes cease to be of use.
the mind authoritatively supplements that of the eye.
intellectual necessity I cross the boundary of the experimental
its latent powers, and notwithstanding our professed reverence for its
potency of all terrestrial life.
to do the precise thing which Professor Virchow declares to be
  'If you ask me,' I say, 'whether there exists the least
independently of antecedent life, my reply is that evidence considered
follow a common example, and accept testimony because it falls in with
 But
have his beliefs upheld; namely, the desire to have them true.
those to whom I refer as having studied this question, believing the
by error, cannot accept it.
prepares from inorganic matter a vast array of substances, which were
 They are
evidenced in the phenomena of crystallisation.
scientifically their _belief_ in its potency, under the proper
  But, in reply to your question,
experimental proof that life can be developed, save from demonstrable
' [Footnote: Quoted by Clifford, 'Nineteenth Century,'
 726.

myself: 'The basis of the doctrine of evolution consists, not in an
this mode of proof--but in its general harmony with scientific
  From contrast, moreover, it derives enormous relative
  On the one side we have a theory, which converts the Power
fashioned after the human model, and acting by broken efforts, as man
  On the other side we have the conception that all we
well as those of the human mind--have their unsearchable roots in a
which is offered to the investigation of man.
in my opinion, this last conception has a higher ethical value than
  Be that as it may, I make here no claim

'Ten years have elapsed' said Dr.
President's Address to the British Association.
publication of "The Origin of Species by Natural Selection," and it is
made in scientific estimation.
passed through four English editions,' [Footnote: Published by Mr.
John Murray, the English publisher of Virchow's Lecture.
antidote are thus impartially distributed by the same hand.
American, two German, two French, several Russian, a Dutch, and an
  So far from Natural Selection being a thing of the
doctrine with almost every philosophical naturalist, including, it
prepared to admit that it accounts for all Mr.
'
ground.
Wahrscheinlichkeit von Darwin's Theorie; er dreht sich aber doch
der Arten annehmen duerfen.
Racenverschiedenheiten auf die von Darwin beschriebene Weise zu kommen
Gattung betrachteten Formen von derselben Urform abstammen, werden
'--(Populaere Vortraege.
decade has now passed, and he is simply blind who cannot see the
  Some of the
  The

amid universal acclamation, conferred on him her Doctor's degree.
Academy of Sciences in Paris, which had so long persistently closed
 Darwin, has also yielded at last; while sermons,
have, to a great extent, become acclimatised to the Darwinian air.
brief reference to Mr.
the knowledge that such changes had been accomplished, and were still

That the lecture of Professor Virchow can, to any practical extent
not believe.
were exemplified by me, years before his voice was heard upon this
  In point of fact, if
to incorporate his wishes in my words, I could not have accomplished
  It is possible, moreover, to draw the
spontaneous generation might have been uttered by me.
opinion that the theory of evolution in its complete form involves the
matter; in other words, involves the assumption that at some period or
'spontaneous generation.
still wanting.
failure of all the attempts made very recently to discover a decided
from the inorganic to the organic world will feel it doubly serious to
accepted as the basis of all our views of life.
that the failures have been lamentable, that the doctrine is utterly
  But my position here is so well known that I need not

With one special utterance of Professor Virchow his translator
  'I have no objection,' observes the Professor,
their connection with the Plastidule company they acquire mind; only I
' This is substantially what I
' The
exhibitions of mind, as psychical phenomena, I simply throw the Psyche
' I may say,
not worth houseroom.
man of culture, strikes in with a foot-note.
Professor Virchow's meaning, we may quote the conclusion at which
offered as an explanation or a simplification of a series of obscure
  "If you are
refuses the yoke of ordinary physical laws, I, for one, would not
"' [Footnote: 'Presidential
1, 1877.
 1, 1877, p.
Virchow's meaning, I admit, required illustration; but I do not
  I do
opprobrium.
dealt with in other places: it may therefore be worth while to spend a

The sting of a wasp at the finger-end announces itself to the brain as
  The impression made by the sting travels, in the first place,
reaches the brain have we the fact of consciousness.
most profoundly on this subject hold that a chemical change, which,
along the nerve, and communicated to the brain.
sting I flap the insect violently away.
of my hand?  The command from the brain to remove the insect travels
unlocked, they perform the work demanded of them.
nerve molecules which unlocked the muscle?  The sense of pain, it may
  But how can a sense of pain, or any other state of
pleasure in the world could lift a stone or move a billiard-ball; why
terms of the sensation, and the difficulty immediately appears.
the idea long ago entertained by philosophers, but lately brought into
themselves, and would go on just as they do if consciousness were not
  Consciousness, on this view, is a kind of
to the molecular changes going on in the brain.

links into the chain of antecedence and sequence, which gives rise to
power of imagining such states interposed between the molecules of the

" Hence an iron strength
action uninfluenced by consciousness.
by those who hold the automaton theory, that states of consciousness
production of consciousness by molecular motion is to me quite as
motion by consciousness.

Incomprehensibles, instead of one Incomprehensible.
from the automaton theory, though maintained by friends who have all
wearisome iteration throughout the foregoing pages; namely, my own

This avowal is repeated with emphasis in the passage to which
  What, I there
subjective--between molecular motions and states of consciousness?
anybody who does.
and subjective are two sides of one and the same phenomenon.
Why should the phenomenon have two sides?  This is the very core
  There are plenty of molecular motions which
  Does water think or feel when it
the molecular motion of the brain be yoked to this mysterious
purely physical processes--the stirring of the brain, the thrilling of
motions of the organism.
which are mentally presentable.

emerges, either as a necessary link, or as an accidental by-product,
  The reverse process of the production of
  We are
canons of science fail to extricate us.
canons, we must deny to subjective phenomena all influence on physical
  The mechanical philosopher, as such, will never place a
mover and moved.
from the one to the other, we meet a blank which the logic of
  This, the reader will remember, is the
  I lay
him that the facts of observation which he considers so simple are
' I go
'If you abandon the interpretations of grosser minds, who image the
which is usually occupied, we know not how, among the molecules of the
the blow of a club, can fly away into other regions of space--if,
the only way in which approach is possible--if you consent to make
more pains than anybody else to show you, refuses the yoke of ordinary
ideality.
theologian, or the defender of theology, who hacks and scourges me for

*****
Notwithstanding the agreement thus far pointed out, there are certain
to take exception.
theory of evolution with Socialism; it may be even questioned whether
  As Lange remarks, the aim of Socialism, or
government, and anything that helps them to this end is welcomed,
  For long years the
therefore regarded with a common hatred.
difference arise between Church and State, than a portion of the
 [Footnote:
 ii.
 538.
experience of the last German elections illustrates Lange's position.
Far nobler and truer to my mind than this fear of promoting Socialism
have substantially accepted, is the position assumed by Helmholtz, who
essentially new creative thought' (einen wesentlich neuen
thought by copious references to the solutions, previously undreamt
  He
dispersed, and shows how the progress of discovery since its first
complete demonstration.
deserves especial mention here.
position acquired by Germany in physiology and medicine, while other
nature.
unflagging and self-denying industry, with purely ideal aims, and
of pure science.
the fields referred to was, in his opinion, something different from
  Enquiries into the nature of life are intimately connected with
a greater fearlessness of the consequences which a full knowledge of
enquirers of other nations.
France,' he says, 'possess distinguished investigators--men competent
natural science; but they have hitherto been compelled to bend before
convictions under the penalty of injuring their social influence and
  Germany has gone forward more courageously.
cherished the trust, which has never been deceived, that complete
follow in the train of half knowledge.
temperate people--a people morally strong--can well afford to look
  Nor are they to be ruined by the enunciation
bases of society.
and more applicable to the condition of Germany at the present moment
  It will be
directed towards France; but France has since that time given ample
anti-Socialists, who would impose on her a yoke which she refuses to

In close connection with these utterances of Helmholtz, I place
appreciated by those to whom it was addressed.
President of the British Association in his opening address in Dublin,
the problem of physical science would be already half solved.
question to which the scientific explorer has often to address himself
whether he can so far unravel the tangled threads of the matter with
all .
.
into the misty vision, until the very clouds wreathe themselves into
  If his ear seem dull, he must listen patiently and
goddess, as she has been called, of a hundred voices--until here and
resound.
pinnacle from which he is called upon to take a perspective survey of
ground; if at such a moment after straining his gaze to the very verge
objects, he should give utterance also to some of the subjective
he should depict possibilities which seem opening to his view; if he
path; _then the fault and the loss would be alike ours if we refused to
hear; then assuredly it is we who would be committing the error of
discriminate between the various elements contained in such a
footing_.


which Professor Virchow places the confessedly abortive attempts to
generation.
scientific thinkers of England accept 'as the basis of all their
' Their induction is by no means thus limited.
have on their side more than the 'reasonable probability' deemed
affairs, that the members of the solar system which are now discrete
during which the work of condensation, through the waste of heat in
the residual nucleus of the flocculent or gaseous ball from which the
  Life, as we define it, was not
  When and how did it
answer.
question is reasoned out.
Bible account of the introduction of life upon the earth as a poem,
the fact?  There does not exist a barrier possessing the strength of a
life to that 'potency of matter' which finds expression in natural
 [Footnote: 'We feel it an undeniable necessity,' says
if it were something disjoined from the whole.
cannot be weakened by the subsequent pleasantry regarding 'Carbon &
']
This hypothesis is not without its difficulties, but they vanish when
  There are various
unable to trace; but we do not think of filling the gap between them
  In like manner
when there was no life in our sense, to the present earth where life
intrusion of an anthropomorphic creator.
and refine their conceptions or be prepared for the rejection of them
  It is they, not we, who lay claim to knowledge
  Our refusal of the creative hypothesis is less an
knowledge which must long, if not always, lie beyond us, and the claim
' At the same time, when I
capacities allow, overwhelming wonder is the predominant feeling.
wonder has come to me from the ages just as much as my understanding,
  Hence I say, if,
your forehead in the dust and acknowledge the authorship of this
relinquished the views of the mechanical theologian, you desire for
of humanity at large, to give ideal form to the Power that moves all
exercise of ideality, if it be only consciously and worthily carried

*****
Again, I think Professor Virchow's position, in regard to the question
  He
  'It is lost,' he says, 'in
  We have received this name from our
century.
_contagium animatum_ as a scientific doctrine, with the same confidence,
set forth.

different minds.
others they will appeal as proofs of genius on the part of those who
  There are men, and by no means the minority, who,
principles; and they are sometimes intolerant of those who can.
are formed to plod meritoriously on the lower levels of thought,
 They cannot
called--by which a man of genius, after long pondering and proving,
tangle of centuries of observation and experiment.
it may be said in passing, who at the present moment stand in this
 Darwin.
to penetration rather than to presumption the notion of a _contagium
  He who invented the term ought, I think, to be held in
analogy, that would justify a man of genius in taking a step so bold.
'Nevertheless,' says Professor Virchow, 'no one was able throughout
 The sixteenth
eighteenth.
conjecture often legitimately comes first.
genius which anticipates the fact and constitutes a spur towards its
  If, instead of being a spur, the theoretic guess rendered
deprecated.
case; Darwin's theory, for example, like the undulatory theory, has
  'At last,' continues
little really to find _contagia animata_.
infer, is due to those who, three centuries in advance, so put
its root and character.
'obstinacy' with which this notion of a _contagium vivum_ emerged.
I should not be inclined to follow him; because I do not know, nor
century is indebted to the stimulus derived from the theoretic
  The genesis of scientific ideas
  He would be but a
the alchemists, who would detach modern atomic doctrines from the
our present knowledge of _contagia_ an origin altogether independent of

*****
Finally, I do not know that I should agree with Professor Virchow as
  I call a theory a principle or
helps us to look for and predict facts not yet observed.
discovery which fits into a theory strengthens it.
a thing complete from the first, but a thing which grows, as it were
  Darwin's theory, as pointed out
this condition of growth; and had they to speak of the subject to-day
theoretic fibre.
left little hope of being ever spanned, have been since filled in, so
with progressive experience and discovery.
fill all the gaps; but this will not prevent a profound belief in the
  Much less
  The man of science who
and isolated.
theory during the phases of its growth as nearly as possible a
practice, our wisdom is to follow its probable suggestions where more
  I write thus with
regret the attitude of denial assumed by Professor Virchow towards
  'I must beg my friend Klebs to pardon me,' he says, 'if,
fungi, I still persist in my reserve so far as to admit only the
they are not actually brought before me.
to say, will continue to deny the Germ Theory, however great the
renders a just account, until it has ceased to be a theory at all, and
  Had he said, 'As long as a
duty to search for it,' I should cordially agree with him.
unreserved denial he quenches the light of probability which ought to
 Both here and in relation to
the other.


--As might have been expected, Professor Virchow, shows himself
laid down in his critique of Dr.
  In his recent discourse
_contagium_?' in the following words: 'Et qu'est-ce que le _contagium_? A
si grande qu'il me semble possible de trouver un organisme
  Mais jusqu' à
'--Revue





  THE ELECTRIC LIGHT.

Britain on Friday, January 17, 1879, and introduced here as the latest
]
THE subject of this evening's discourse was proposed by our late
 [Footnote: Mr.
of the Royal Society]  That word 'late' has for me its own
  It implies, among other things, the loss of a comrade
  On the other hand,
seen him rise by sheer intrinsic merit, moral and intellectual, to the
to bestow.
promote the interests and extend the usefulness of this institution,
public attention, a few sound notions regarding it, on the more purely
in the public mind.
the best of my ability, to realise the idea of our friend.


the scientific men of the age flung themselves with ardour upon the
many ways.
attention, and in the innumerable tests and trials to which this
of exalting the light was on all hands recognised.
 Children, with
wires eighteen inches long, while 'points of charcoal produced a light
'
 110.
reached their culmination when, in 1808, through the liberality of a
battery of two thousand pairs of plates, with which he afterwards
previously observed.
was four inches long, and by its heat quartz, sapphire, magnesia, and
diamond and plumbago rapidly disappeared as if reduced to vapour.
[Footnote: In the concluding lecture at the Royal Institution in June,
  He then fused iridium,

 xxxv.
 463.
first production of the spark between coal-points to Curtet in 1802.
Davy certainly in that year showed the carbon light with a battery of

 Inst.
 i.
 166).

light by the electric current is that it shall encounter and overcome
  Flowing through a perfect conductor, no matter what the
developed.
unwarmed an atmospheric discharge competent to shiver to splinters a
  I send the self-same current through a wire composed
  The silver offers little
  The consequence is that the
warmed.
employed for the production of the electric light.
between them offers a powerful resistance to the passage of the
across this interval that the voltaic current is able to throw the
heat, and to which its effulgence is due.
air usually suffices to stop the current.
are first brought together and then separated, there occurs between
the current over a considerable space.
from the incandescent carbons.
a blue flame which, being usually bent by the earth's magnetism,
 [Footnote: The part played by
thallium when mixed together and volatilised in the arc.
first selects as its carrier the most volatile metal, which in this
  While it continues abundant, the passage of the
generated is incompetent to volatilise the silver.
disappears the current is forced to concentrate its power; it presses
carbons with a vapour which, as long as the necessary resistance is
  I have on a former occasion
operating upon a mixture of constituents volatile in different
  When, in 1872, I first observed the effect here described,
absence.

transcendent light without applying it to the illumination of our
  Such applications suggested themselves at the
  The first
in part by ordinary combustion, and in part by the electric transfer
  To keep the carbons at
believe, by Staite, and the most successful by Duboscq, Foucault, and
Gramme, Lontin, and others.
was practically overcome; but the second, a graver one, is probably
  It arises
material universe demands an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth,
without the expenditure of an absolutely equal quantity of some other
  Hence, in practice, the desirability of any transformation
power expended.
ignited in a flame, but it is possible to avoid the introduction of
this room.
concave mirror, which concentrates to a point the divergent electric
  The zinc burns at the focus
generated by its combustion.
but in liquids.
it; it is also thus burnt in the voltaic battery.
obtain the oxygen necessary for its combustion, the zinc has to
  The
liquid falls short of that developed by its combustion in air, by the

work, only one-fifth remaining to warm the battery.
residue that we must now fix our attention, for it is solely out of it

Before you are two small voltaic batteries of ten cells each.
ends of one of them are united by a thick copper wire, while into the
  The platinum

combustion in air a constant quantity of heat.
developed by an ounce of zinc through its union with oxygen in the
  Let our two batteries, then,

on the hearth where the fuel is burnt, that is to say in the cells of
  In the other case, the heat is in part domestic

the foreign and domestic--of the external and internal--heats is fixed
  Hence, to have heat outside, you must draw upon the
  These remarks apply to the electric light.
inter-mediation of the electric current the moderate warmth of the
at any distance from its origin, a heat next in order to that of the
  The current might therefore be defined as the swift carrier of
  Loading itself here with invisible power, by a process of
discharge its load, in the fraction of a second, as light and heat, at

Thus, the light and heat produced outside the battery are derived from
an expensive fuel, though we have possessed the electric light for
use.
discovered a new source of electricity, which we have now to
  On the table before me lies a coil of covered copper
  I lift one side of the coil from the
the simple weight of the coil.
experiment.
found greater than before.
earth's magnetic force, such cutting, as proved by Faraday, being
'induced' electric current which, as long as the ends of the coil
  The
exact equivalent of the excess of effort just referred to as over and
  When
are united it encounters a resistance over and above that of the air.
It generates an electric current opposed in direction to the first,
  The amount of the
current developer in the coil.
these induced currents, among which the instruments of Pixii, Clarke,
  Faraday, indeed, foresaw that such
of the mechanician, while he himself pursued the deeper study of facts
  'I have rather,' he writes in 1831, 'been desirous
magneto-electric induction, than of exalting the force of those
development hereafter.

and noblest purpose of augmenting our knowledge of the powers of
  It had been discovered and applied to intellectual ends, its
  The Drummond
illumination.
an attempt was made to organise a company in Paris for the purpose of
magneto-electric machine constructed by M.
hydrogen necessary for the lime light.
apparatus by which it was attempted suggested to Mr.
more hopeful applications.
light, with persevering skill Holmes continued to improve the
a magneto-electric light comparable to that of the voltaic battery.
Judged by later knowledge, this first machine would be considered
antecedent events, it marked a great step forward.


their 'Scientific Adviser;' and it is interesting to notice in his
which characterised him.
guided and controlled by a disciplined judgment.
charger, holding it in by a strong rein.
he states the case of the light pro and con.
the inventor, and, as regards cost, rejecting sanguine estimates, he
for the solution of this important question.
however, strongly in favour of the light.
experiment made at the South Foreland on the 20th of April, 1859, he
  At
were twice as long as those from the lower lighthouse, and apparently
  The horizontal plane in which they
  The tops of
striking in their effect upon the eye.
expresses himself thus: 'In fulfilment of this part of my duty, I beg
established the fitness and sufficiency of the magneto-electric light
concerned.
have yet seen so applied, and in principle may be accumulated to any
and its care there may be confided to attentive keepers of the
' Finally, as regards the
only fair to add the following remark with which Faraday closes the
29th of April, 1859: 'I must bear my testimony,' he says, 'to the
  He has
applied principle, given every reason for a change either in this or
manner that was very agreeable to me, whose duty it was to search for
time and the future.
to the Trinity House bears date February 2, 1857.

intelligent courage to establish the machines of Holmes permanently at
many years.

that of Holmes, being in various ways a very marked improvement on the
  Its currents were stronger and its light was brighter than
  In it, moreover, the commutator, the
deterioration in the machine of Holmes, was, at the suggestion of M.
Masson, entirely abandoned; alternating currents instead of the direct
 [Footnote: Du Moncel, 'l'Electricité,'
 150.
 Serrin modified his excellent lamp with

shown, M.
Brethren of the Trinity House.
and he replied as follows: 'I am not aware that the Trinity House
will require more magneto-electric machines, or whether, if they
supply in this country, from the source already open to them, would
  Therefore I do not see that at present they want
'  Faraday was obviously swayed by the desire to
which fall upon the pioneer.
with success at Cape la Hève, near Havre; and the Elder Brethren of
decided, in 1868, on the introduction of machines on the Alliance

continue in operation.
electricity to lighthouse purposes, the course of events was this: The
Hève on December 26, 1863, or nearly two years later.
experimental trial at the South Foreland preceded the lighting of
  The electric light was afterwards
  The light was started at Souter Point on

At the Lizard, which enjoys the newest and most powerful development

*****
I have now to revert to a point of apparently small moment, but which
subject.
by Dr.
  Instead of employing coils wound
Siemens, after giving a bar of iron the proper shape, wound his wire
effects between suitably placed magnetic poles.
employed in the small magneto-electric machine which I now introduce
 Henry
  There are here sixteen permanent horse-shoe
Siemens armature.
armature are now disconnected.
armature to rotate, I simply overcome ordinary mechanical friction.
But the two ends of the armature coil can be united in a moment, and
resistance to rotation.
friction of the machine is now to be overcome, and by the expenditure

in the electric currents generated, and the heat produced by their
  A portion of this heat may be
platinum wire.
wire glows, first with a red heat, then with a white heat, and finally
  The moment the wire melts, the circuit round
the arm being the consequence.
heat here developed.
certain amount of combustible substance was oxidised or burnt in the
  Had it done no external work, the matter consumed
  Now, the muscular heat
this definite amount, the missing heat being reproduced to the last
machine.
muscles and the generated heat, exactly as it did a moment ago between
  The electric current is
of muscle and battery to any distance from the hearth where the fuel
  Not only is the current a messenger, but it is also an
  The temperature of my arm is, in round
one of the most refractory of metals, which requires a heat of 3,600°
  to fuse it, has been reduced to the molten condition.

electric light produced by its combustion being used for the common
muscles, or even the muscles of a horse, would be more expensive
  Here, however, we can employ the force of burning coal to turn
possible by Faraday's discovery, which opens out to us the prospect of

In 1866 a great step in the intensification of induced currents, and
by Mr.
  It fell to my lot to report upon them to the
Manchester to witness Mr.
  He operated in this
moment ago, he employed its current to excite an electro-magnet of a
[Footnote: Page and Moigno had previously shown that the
] from
generated by the small magneto-electric machine.
have been immediately employed to produce the electric light; but
vast size, between whose poles rotated a Siemens armature of
  Three armatures therefore were involved in
magneto-electric machine; secondly, the armature of the first
armature of the second electro-magnet, which was of vast dimensions.
With the currents drawn from this third armature, Mr.
effects, both as regards heat and light, enormously transcending those
 [Footnote: Mr.
'Philosophical Transactions 'for 1867, p.
  My opinion regarding
Brethren of the Trinity House on May 17, 1866: 'It gives me pleasure
transcends in power all other apparatus of the kind.

question to the front is now to be considered.
February, 1867, a paper was received by the Royal Society from Dr.
William Siemens bearing the title, 'On the Conversion of Dynamic into
' [Footnote: A
 Werner Siemens, was read on January
  In a letter to
 622, p.
 Robert Sabine states that
 Stroh in the
  I do not doubt Mr.
statement; still it would be dangerous in the highest degree to depart
that the date of a discovery is the date of its publication.
the end of December, 1866, Mr.
provisional specification (which, I believe, is a sealed document)
years elapsed before he made anything public.

mention him (Proc.
  Soc, March 14, 1867).
national trait, that sealed communications, though allowed in France,
] On
bearing the title, 'On the Augmentation of the Power of a Magnet by
' Both
illustrated by experiments, were read upon the same night, viz.
14th of February.
science a more beautiful example of the interaction of natural forces
  You can hardly find a bit of
not possess a trace of permanent magnetism; and from such a small
interactions between magnet and armature to a magnetic intensity
  Conceive the Siemens armature placed between
 Suppose this latter to possess
rotates, currents of infinitesimal strength are generated in its coil.
Let the ends of that coil be connected with the wire surrounding the
  The infinitesimal current generated in the armature
infinitesimal amount.
the coil which feeds it, producing a current of greater strength.
This current again passes round the magnet, which immediately brings
  By this play of mutual give
raised in a very brief interval from almost nothing to complete
  Such a magnet and armature are able to produce
into the common circuit of magnet and armature, we can readily obtain
 [Footnote: In 1867 Mr.
modification of dividing the armature into two separate coils, one of
currents.
trouble and expense involved in the employment of permanent magnets;
the duplication of the electro-magnets.
generator is so far simplified, and reduced in cost, as to enable
illumination.

Wheatstone, Mr.
Trinity House, endeavoured to turn this discovery to account for
  Already, in the spring of 1869, he had
extraordinary power.
dioptric apparatus placed on the Trinity Wharf at Blackwall, and
 Douglass, and myself, from an
  Falling
miles all round.
been previously witnessed.
rapidly distanced by the safer and more powerful machines of Siemens

As regards lighthouse illumination, the next step forward was taken by
  Having previously
Cornwall, they instituted, at the time referred to, an elaborate
the Alliance Company, of Siemens, and of Gramme, were pitted against
  The Siemens and the Gramme machines delivered direct
alternating currents.
intensity in all azimuths; that of the former was different in
gush of light of special intensity in one direction.
table gives in standard candles the performance of the respective

           Maximum.

Holmes                        1,523       1,523
Alliance                      1,953       1,953
Gramme (No.
               6,663       4,016
Gramme (No.
               6,663       4,016
Siemens (Large)              14,818       8,932
Siemens (Small, No.

 2)        6,864       4,138
Two Holmes's coupled          2,811       2,811
Two Gramme's (Nos.

 1 and 2)  14,134       8,520
[Footnote: Observations from the sea on the night of November 21,
Alliance.
resistance was abolished, and previous to which the light-keepers had
the differences recorded in the table.
powerful lights at the South Foreland caused my face to peel, as if it
]
These determinations were made with extreme care and accuracy by Mr.
Douglass, the engineer-in-chief, and Mr.
of the Trinity House.
photo-metrically and directly the flame of the candle with these
  A light of intermediate intensity--that of the
compared with the electric light.
being afterwards determined, the intensity of the electric light
  The numbers given in the table prove the superiority of
  They prove the great
machine over the Alliance.
yield a light far exceeding all the others, while the coupling of two
was followed by a very great augmentation of the light, rising in the
candles to 14,134.
resistance small, great advantages attach to the Siemens light.
this contest, which was conducted throughout in the most amicable
 2 were chosen for the Lizard.
[Footnote: As the result of a recent trial by Mr.
have been also chosen for India.


machines capable of sustaining several lights.
for example, which ignites the Jablochkoff candles on the Thames
passing through its own circuit.
through which the current belonging to the circuit passes in
  The lights correspond to so many resisting spaces, over
accomplishes the leap being that which produces the light.
the current is to be competent to pass through five lamps in
the will and skill of the maker of the machine.
definite laws laid down by Ohm half a century ago, by which he must

Ohm has taught us how to arrange the elements of a Voltaic battery so
namely, which urges the current forward and enables it to surmount
  We have only to link the cells together so that
and add its electro-motive force to that of all the others.
increase, it is true, at the same time the resistance of the battery,
augment the power of the integrated current to overcome external
  The resistance of the battery itself may, indeed, be
comparison.
equally true of magneto-electric machines.
leap over five intervals, and produce five lights in succession, we
  This is done through
rotating armature as, a moment ago, we augmented the cells of our
  Each additional convolution, like each additional
though it also adds its resistance, thereby diminishing the quantity
becomes endowed with the power of leaping across the successive spaces
  The
the simultaneous addition of internal resistance and electro-motive
  The machines, on the other hand, which produce only a single
electro-motive force.
armature is comparatively short and thick, copper riband instead of
  Such machines deliver a large quantity

interval, to produce one splendid light, their currents are unable to
  Thus, by
gain electro-motive force; while by lessening the number of the

depends entirely upon the external work the machine has to perform.
the object be to obtain a single light of great splendour, machines of
  If we want to
machines of high internal resistance and of correspondingly high

When a coil of covered wire surrounds a bar of iron, the two ends of
of the bar is accompanied by the development of an induced current in
  The current is only excited during the period of magnetic
  No matter how strong or how weak the magnetism of the bar may
developed.
of the bar to be moved along it towards the other end.
time of the pole's motion there will be an incessant change in the
induced current in the surrounding coil.
magnet, we move the bar and its surrounding coil past the magnetic
a similar current will be induced in the coil.
fundamental conception which led M.
beautiful machine.
 176.
also Gaugain on the Gramme machine, 'Ann.
 et de Phys,'
 xxviii.
 324]  He aimed at giving continuous motion to such
a continuous ring, which, by a suitable mechanism, he caused to rotate
  The direction of
influencing pole.
semicircles of the coil surrounding the ring flowed in opposite
  But it was easy, by the mechanical arrangement called a
same direction.
direct currents, similar to those yielded by the voltaic pile.

currents.
lights now exhibited on the Holborn Viaduct and the Thames Embankment.

 Lontin.
resembles in shape a toothed iron wheel, the teeth being used as
  The wheel is
electromagnets.
magnetised, and instantly evokes in its surrounding coil an induced
  The currents excited in
poles, move in opposite directions, but by means of a commutator these
common bed.
increased in number as to augment indefinitely the power of the
  To excite his electro-magnets, M.
principle of Mr.
  A small machine furnishes a direct current,
machine.
Thames Embankment and the Holborn Viaduct; a small Gramme machine
one.

  It
inducing electro-magnets, the latter being excited by the method
  In the machines intended for
great as to permit of the introduction of several lights in the same
  A peculiarly novel feature of the Farmer-Wallace system is
  Instead of rods, two large plates of
  The
according as the carbon is dissipated.
this case far exceeds that obtainable with rods.
four of these lights in the same circuit in Mr.
City, and they are now, I believe, employed at the Liverpool Street
  The Farmer-Wallace 'quantity
  It is
electric light, but it can fuse thick copper wires.
a short bar of iridium, this refractory metal emits a light of
 [Footnote: The iridium light was shown by Mr.
Ladd.
Institution.

 de Méritens, which he has generously brought over
  In its
machine, employing permanent magnets as the exciters of the induced
  Using the magnets of the Alliance Company, by a skilful
 de Méritens produces with eight magnets
machines.
little more than one-fourth of the latter.
the commutator is abolished.
and the absorption of power, in relation to the effects produced, is
  With his larger machines M.
considerable number of lights in the same circuit.
small machine transforms one-and-a-quarter horse-power into heat and
five-horse power, yielding about 9,000 candles.


contrivers of regulators and the constructors of machines.
 Rapieff
reason to know that he is engaged on a machine which, when complete,
  Instead of two single carbon
 Rapieff employs two pairs of rods, each pair forming a V.
light is produced at the common junction of the four carbons.
device for regulating the light is of the simplest character.
bottom of the stand which supports the carbons are two small
  One of them, when the current passes, draws the
leaving the control of the light to the other.
to approach each other by a descending weight, which acts in
  Through the liberality of the
 Rapieff
  The
witnessing, under the guidance of M.
effectual and agreeable to the eye.
in the same circuit, and the regulators are so devised that the

 Rapieff has lately improved his regulator.

crowding in.
 Werdermann has been long known in connection with
  Employing as negative carbon a disc, and as positive
results.
enable Mr.
traversed by a current of only moderate electro-motive power.

the point of a thin carbon rod, properly adjusted, is caused to touch
point.
wheel.
last, in the improvement of regulators is this: The positive carbon
to the greater heat of the former.
 William Siemens
wholly preventing its waste.
negative pole a hollow cone of copper, and by ingeniously discharging
  His
dissipated, the positive carbon only needing control.
this lamp in action, and can bear witness to its success.

  Indeed,
talent into this domain of applied electricity.
prospects are modified from day to day, a steady advance being made
  With regard
electric light will at no distant day triumph over gas.
sure that it will do so in our private houses.
anxious to avoid dropping a word here that could influence the share
statement of opinion.

realisation of the idea, of causing the carbon rods to burn away like
  It is needless to say that I here refer to the young
 Jablochkoff.
small distance apart, and fills the space between them with an
  The carbon rods are fixed
  A momentary contact is established between the
horizontally from top to top.
dissipated or removed by the current, the passage of which once
  The carbons gradually waste,
  The
regards the current, the insulating plaster is practically inert.
Indeed, as proved by M.
 Wilde, the plaster may be
between the naked carbons.
 de Méritens has recently brought out a
principal carbons is placed a third insulated rod of the same
  With the small de Méritens machine two of these candles can
 [Footnote:
 de Méritens and the Farmer-Wallace machine were
Messrs.
  The Siemens machine was worked by
]  In the Jablochkoff candle it is necessary that the carbons
  Hence the necessity for
  It
 Jablochkoff has abolished regulators altogether,
  In my judgment, the
Holborn Viaduct is highly creditable, notwithstanding a considerable
  The Jablochkoff lamps, it may be
scattered abroad by the adjacent houses, than in the positions which

*****
It was my custom some years ago, whenever I needed a new and
and to talk the matter over with him.
mind which this habit opened out was always of the highest interest to
  I particularly well remember the impression made upon me on such
 Darker, a philosophical instrument maker in
  This man's life was a struggle, and the reason of it was not
  No matter how commercially lucrative the work upon which
seize and realise the ideas of a scientific man.
power, and an inventor's delight in its exercise.
 Becker
  On the
as eminent instances of ability of this kind.
liquid on the point of crystallisation.
of constructive thought immediately shoot through them.

by what he has already accomplished.
the relationship of facts and principles, and the art to reduce them
  Hence, though he has thus far
electric light, an adverse opinion as to his ability to solve the

I will endeavour to illustrate in a simple manner Mr.
mode of electric illumination, taking advantage of what Ohm has taught
regarding the relation of resistance to the development of light and
  From one end of a voltaic battery runs a wire, dividing at a
connected with the other end of the battery.
the battery the current passes first through the single wire to the
according to a well-known law.
the current divides itself equally between them.
less resistant than the other, more than half the current will choose
  The strict law is that the quantity of current is
  A clear image of the
  When a river meets
afterwards reuniting.
width, and inclination, the water will divi de itself equally between
  If they be unequal, the larger quantity of water will flow
  And, as in the case of the water we may
subdivision of the trunk stream, so in the case of electricity we may
dividing itself among them, in accordance with the law which fixes the

Let us apply this knowledge.
we may call an 'electric main,' to be laid down along one of our
  Let this rod be connected with one end
established between the other end of the battery and the water-pipes
  As long as the electric main continues unconnected
flow; but if any part of the main, however distant from the battery,
completed and the current will flow.
Charing Cross, and our rod of copper to be tapped opposite Somerset
current passing through the wire may be subdivided into any number of
water-pipes to the battery.
raise to vivid incandescence a refractory metal like iridium or one of
  Instead of being tapped at one point, our main may be
  The current will divide in strict
by its strength.
circulation of the blood; the electric main carrying the outgoing
return current representing a great vein, while the intermediate
distributed through the system.

  The electric force is at
  Metals sufficiently refractory to bear being raised to vivid
  The principles which regulate the
perfectly well known.
scientific sense of the term, but there is ample room for the exercise
so many other useful inventions.
of the practical problem, I should certainly prefer seeing it in Mr.
Edison's hands to having it in mine.
ago the radiation from incandescent platinum was admirably
 Draper of New York.


it is light without heat; but to disprove this, it is only necessary
voltaic arc transcends that of any other terrestrial source.
emission from the carbon points is capable of accurate analysis.
simplify the subject, we will take the case of a platinum wire at
white heat.
no power on the optic nerve.
and not until the temperature of the wire has reached nearly 1,000°
  The rays which
hand but cannot excite vision.
raised to whiteness, these dark rays not only persist, but they are
  They constitute about 95 per cent.
of the total radiation from the white-hot platinum wire.
nearly 90 per cent.

invisible emission as an accompaniment.
it were, built upon the invisible as its necessary foundation.

rays as the visible ones enter the radiation and augment in power.
transparency of the elementary gases and metalloids--of oxygen,
and even of carbon, for the invisible heat rays is extraordinary.
Dissolved in a proper vehicle, iodine cuts the visible radiation
  By
the number of our effectual ray-filters.
black as pitch for the visible, while remaining transparent for the
  By such filters it is possible to detach the
augmentation as the light increases.
platinum wire when it first feels warm to the touch--when, therefore,
from the same wire raised to a white heat may be 500 or more.
[Footnote: See article 'Radiation', vol.
]
It is not, then, by the diminution or transformation of the
maintain their ground as the necessary antecedents and companions of
  When detached and concentrated, these powerful heat
at the siege of Syracuse.
glimmer of light, or to affect the most delicate air-thermometer, they

without fusion, they can raise it to a heat so white and luminous as
  In this way
light rays of all colours.
rays to excite vision, that the eye has been placed at a focus
experiencing any visual impression.
amount of heat imparted by the incandescent carbons to the air is far
  It is less, because of the
quantity of fuel consumed in a given time.
the air cannot penetrate the carbons as it penetrates a flame.
temperature of the flame is lowered by the admixture of a gas which
appropriates and diffuses the heat, does not aid in the combustion;
nitrogen, renders necessary the combustion of a greater amount of gas
  In fact, though the statement may
temperature that the electric light seems so cool.
temperature that renders the proportion of luminous to non-luminous
  The
 It glows in
  Its light and heat are therefore not
atmosphere.

subject; first, the investigator and discoverer, whose object is,
the practical mechanician, whose object is mainly industrial.
would be easy, and probably in many cases true, to say that the one
am persuaded that the mechanician not unfrequently merges the hope of
  Members of each of these classes are
  There is, for example,
discoveries of pure science to those who apply them: 'Your grand
sought with a practical intent--truths which their discoverers pursued
  Those
those who discovered them had neither the time nor the inclination to
  Your rising workshops, your
this luxury, this tumult,'--this commotion,' he would have added, were
discoverers in Science, though all remain strange to them.
that a discovery enters the market they abandon it; it concerns them
'
In writing thus, Cuvier probably did not sufficiently take into
itself.
new one is often tantamount to an enlargement and refinement of the
  Beyond this, the amelioration
human brain.
bear in mind that those practical applications which strike the public
antecedent labours begun, continued, and ended, under the operation of
  'Few,' says Pasteur, 'seem to
of nations.
employment in lectures, speeches, and official language of the
"  A statesman of the greatest
science had rightly yielded place to that of applied science.
I venture to say, could be more dangerous, even to practical life,
  They show
 There
could be given.
are united as tree and fruit.


  We have amongst us a small
aspirations--who would place the operations of the scientific mind
science the course that he ought to pursue.
get its wisdom they do not explain.
scientific theories; they scorn all reference to aether, and atoms,
yet such ultra-sensible conceptions are often the spur to the greatest
  The source, in fact, from which the true natural
ideal.
  Nearly half a century ago,
expressed regret that such a discovery should have been made, as it
  To
sending Faraday back to his bookbinder's bench as a more dignified and
  And yet it is
illuminate our streets, halls, quays, squares, warehouses, and,
