always been favorite pastimes of science fiction.    In my first science 
grand tradition.  
the genre's  pioneers.  Nowadays, space-exploration has a past as 
just by dreams, but by a real-life track record.
stars, and that humankind evolved from the primordial slime in order 
powerful ideas with an almost religious appeal.  They also smack a 
Soviets found them particularly attractive.  
anybody, but the philosophical  glamor of "storming the cosmos" 
Instead, the Space Race was a creation of the Cold War --  its course 
space *because* the Soviets had gone into space, and because the 
their way of life was superior to capitalism.   
intercontinental rockets whose primary purpose (up to that point) had 
symbolic, touch-football version of World War III.   For this reason 
opinion, the Space Race was worth every cent.  But the fact that it was 
	Because of this political aspect, NASA's primary product was 
relations spectaculars.   The Apollo project was the premiere example.  
public-relations achievement, and it pretty much crushed the Soviet 
	On the other hand, like most "spectaculars," Apollo delivered 
waving, speeches, and plaque-laying; a lot of wonderful TV coverage; 
capacity to fly human beings to the moon.  No one else seems 
Europeans, Indians, Chinese and Japanese all have their own space 
Indonesians have their own satellites now.)	
Paradigm."   The assumption was (and is) that only large, spectacular 
NASA, and deliver the necessary funding to support its eleven-billion-
	The march of science -- the urge to actually find things out 
force for NASA.   NASA has been a very political animal; the space-
	Unfortunately for NASA, a few historical home truths are 
	First and foremost, the Space Race is over.   There is no more 
opposition is in abject ruins.   The Americans won the Cold War.  In 
space-race victory laps.  
is clearly a white elephant.   The Shuttle is overly complex,  over-
provide all things for all constituents, and ended-up with an 
and it will never fulfill the outrageous promises made for it in the '70s.  
vase.
too much, and is destroying other and more useful possibilities for 
the Shuttle and the Space Station together will devour most *all* of 
increases in funding.    
because the Space Station cannot capture the public imagination.   
*already have* a space station.  They've had a space station for years 
awe but tepid public indifference.  Rumor has it that the Soviets (or 
Peace" to any bidder for eight hundred million dollars, about one 
be bothered to buy it!
flight is simply not like other forms of "exploring."   "Exploring" 
tangle hand-to-hand with wonderful stuff you know nothing about.   
regimented of human activities.  Most everything that is to happen on 
predicted, not carefully calculated beforehand, is very likely to be a 
	Reading the personal accounts of astronauts does not reveal 
understood.  On the contrary, the historical and personal record 
motivation is not to "boldly go where no one has gone before," but 
the hardware.*  
tiny peak of a vast human pyramid of earth-bound technicians and  
(*necessarily* tight)  electronic leash by Ground Control.  And they 
of space-suits and space vehicles.  They don't tackle the challenges of 
challenges of their own complex and expensive life-support 
	The years of manned space-flight have provided us with the 
People in free-fall lose calcium from their bones -- about half a percent 
grim phenomenon that causes osteoporosis in the elderly -- 
how bad this syndrome can get, since no one has been in orbit much 
particular sign of slowing down.   The human heart shrinks in free-
loss of muscle, over a period of months in orbit, causes astronauts and 
	There are other syndromes as well.  Lack of gravity causes 
faced look familiar from Shuttle videos.   Eventually, the body reacts 
effects of this are poorly understood.  About this time, red blood cell 
are produced in free-fall tend to be interestingly malformed.
space has been severely nuked yet, but if a solar flare caught a crew in 
	These are not insurmountable medical challenges, but they 
surprising that an organism that evolved for billions of years in 
strength and  plasticity that we can survive and thrive for quite a 
like to settle in space for long periods.  It's neither easy nor pleasant. 
They're not quite sure why people should go there, nor what people 
to do this despite all obstacles.
space, that would be a different prospect.   A  commercial  career in 
say, bomb-disposal, or test-pilot work, or maybe even coal-mining.   
the communications satellite industry.   The comsat industry wants 
	Consider this:  it costs $200 million to make one shuttle flight.  
business, just like GE, AT&T, GTE and Hughes Aircraft.   You can join 
in the telecommunications business, year after year.  You can do quite 
people thrive today by commercializing space.  But the Space Shuttle, 
make or do on the Shuttle that will remotely repay that investment.   
commercial industry anywhere whose business it is to rent workspace 
	The era of manned spectaculars is visibly dying by inches.  It's 
of NASA, the heroes of Apollo and its stalwarts of tradition, are 
three-quarters of the old guard will be gone.
for space enthusiasts, but the situation's not actually all that dismal at 
continued apace.  It's a little known fact that America's *military* 
is the poorly publicized, hush-hush, national security budget for 
of verification," i.e. spy satellites.  And then there are military 
impressive national asset.   The much-promoted Strategic Defence 
for this world, in either budgets or rhetoric  -- but both Navstar and 
military.   They promise and deliver solid and useful achievements, 
	And  communications satellites have come a very long way since 
simultaneous phone calls plus three channels of cable television.   
technologies; they have a well-established market, much pent-up 
satellite launch business is no longer a superpower monopoly; comsats 
Kazakhstan, home of the Soviet launching facilities at Baikonur, is 
	Weather satellites have proven vital to public safety and 
keep weather satellites in orbit and improve them technically -- not 
makes a lot of common sense and it really pays.
Apollo Paradigm still rules at NASA.   NASA is still utterly determined 
for this decision.  Planetary exploration,  life science missions, and 
curtailed, or delayed in the1992 budget.  All this, in the hope of 
of building the manned 30-billion-dollar Space Station Freedom.   
probe; an advanced x-ray astronomy facility; a space infrared 
learned a very great deal from these projects  (assuming that they 
contrast, will show us very little that we haven't already seen.
strategy.  With imagination, with a change of emphasis, the 
   	In 1951, when writing his seminal non-fiction work THE 
imaginative scenario of unmanned spaceflight.  
speculated.  "Under the guidance of a tiny yet extremely complex 
quarters.  A camera is photographing the landscape below, and the 
narrow radio beam.  It is unlikely that true television will be possible, 
could be expected is that still pictures could be transmitted at intervals 
	This is probably as close as a science fiction writer can come to 
early Mars probes.  Mr. Clarke well understood the principles and 
1951, he somewhat underestimated the long-term potentials of that 
"true television."    In the 1990s, the technologies of rocketry have 
electronic media are exploding exponentially.     
possible to speculate on the future of "space exploration" along 
exploration, sometime in the first quarter of the twenty-first century.   
rockets, no pressure-domes, no tractor-trailers, no human settlers.  
them equipped not merely with "true television," but something much 
operator can see what they see, hear what they hear, even guide them 
lag).    These micro-rovers, crammed with cheap microchips and laser 
the Martian grit beneath their little scuttling claws.  Piloting one of 
cranny of the Moon -- now *that* really feels like "exploration."  If 
	No one lives in space stations, in this scenario.  Instead, our 
are no "rockets"  any more.  Most of these robot surrogates weigh less 
on high-flying aircraft.  Or perhaps they're launched by laser-ignition:  
provide their thrust.   They might even be literally shot into orbit by 
technology of Gerald Bull's Iraqi "super-cannon."   This wacky but 
beings, since the acceleration g-load would shatter every bone in their 
	And small robots  have many other advantages.  Unlike manned 
into the shrapnel-heavy rings of Saturn, or onto the acid-bitten 
operational, not for mere days or weeks, but for decades.   They are 
	And because they are small and numerous, they should be 
space-probe that is cheap, small, disposable, and numerous: as cheap 
while taking advantage of new materials like carbon-fiber, fiber-
	The core idea of this particular vision is "fast, cheap, and out of 
like NASA's Hubble Telescope (crippled by bad optics) or NASA's 
these micro-rovers are cheap, and legion, and everywhere.   They get 
more, and no one's life is at stake.   People, even quite ordinary people, 
satellite cable-TV service.   If you want to know what Neptune looks 
yourself.*
exploration, rather than the necessarily tiny elite of astronauts.  This 
expensive practice of launching actual human bodies into space.  We 
space exploration, run by a NASA elite in labcoats, is replaced by a 
	In this scenario, "space exploration" becomes similar to other 
visualization, computer graphics, virtual reality, telepresence.  The 
Outer space becomes *outer cyberspace.*
science-fictional dream, a vision for the exploration of space:  
circumstance, lucky accidents, and imponderables like political will.   
terribly far-fetched:  they have outlived all contact with the political, 
longer any real point in shipping human beings into space in order to 
	"Exploring space" is not an "unrealistic" idea.   That much, at 
how and to what end.  True, "exploring space" is not as "important" 
eminence.   Space science cannot realistically expect to command the 
prestige.   That era is simply gone; it's history now.   
genuine interest in these topics.   An interest in the stars and planets is 
sciences.  It's deeply rooted in the human psyche, has great historical 
constituency, and if its plans were modest and workable, and played 
	The world doesn't actually need NASA's billions to learn about 
never got more than a fraction of NASA's budget in the first place. 
federal military-industrial bureaucracies.  Micro-rover projects could 
scale research consortia.   It would play from the impressive strengths 
rather than the dying, centralized, militarized, politicized rocket-tech 
	The task at hand is to create a change in the climate of opinion 
like the rest of us, grew up in the Cold War; like the rest of us, it must 
has a very real and influential role in space exploration.   History 
vision.  At its heart it has always been about vision.  
