
Although Mathematical Science is the most ancient and the most perfect
been clearly determined.
remained till now vague and uncertain.
Mathematics"--by which we commonly designate it, would alone suffice to

In truth, it was not till the commencement of the last century that the
were each of them sufficiently developed to permit the true spirit of
 Since that epoch the
perfecting of the different branches, and by the application which they
them to give due attention to the general system of the science.

longer so rapid as to forbid the contemplation of the whole.
of mathematics is now sufficiently developed, both in itself and as to
consistency in which we ought to strive to arrange its different parts
 We may even
directly paved the way for this important philosophical operation, by
previously exist.

from the indefinite and meaningless definition of it usually given, in
"_The science which has for its object the measurement of magnitudes.
Let us see how we can rise from this rough sketch (which is singularly
veritable definition, worthy of the importance, the extent, and the



_Measuring Magnitudes.
itself presents to the mind no other idea than that of the simple direct
be known, which it takes for the _unit_ of comparison among all others
 According to this definition, then, the science of
be--instead of being an immense concatenation of prolonged mental
activity, would seem to consist of a simple series of mechanical
measured to those by which we wish to measure them, by the aid of
practiced by the carpenter with his rule.

which is almost always, on the contrary, very indirect.
measurement of a magnitude, by superposition or any similar process, is
if we had no other means for determining magnitudes than direct
those which interest us.

_ The force of this general observation will be understood
evidently offers the most facility--that of the measurement of one
 This comparison, which is certainly the most
directly.
render a line susceptible of a direct measurement, we see that most
 The first and
the line from one end of it to the other, in order to apply the unit of
greater part of the distances which interest us the most; in the first
of them to the earth; and then, too, even the greater number of
 But even if
necessary that the length be neither too great nor too small, which
 The line must also
greatest facility, if it were horizontal, but conceive it to be turned

The difficulties which we have indicated in reference to measuring
surfaces, volumes, velocities, times, forces, &c.
makes necessary the formation of mathematical science, as we are going
cases, the direct measurement of magnitudes, and to seek to determine
of mathematics.

_ The general method which is constantly employed, and
admit of a direct measurement, consists in connecting them with others
which we succeed in discovering the first through the relations which
 Such is the precise object of mathematical
 In order to form a sufficiently extended idea
may be indirect in very different degrees.
which are often the most important, the magnitudes, by means of which
be measured directly, and must therefore, in their turn, become the
human mind is obliged to establish a long series of intermediates
its researches, and the system of magnitudes susceptible of direct
at first they appear to have no connexion.

_ Some examples will make clear any thing which may seem

1.
_ Let us consider, in the first place, a natural
a mathematical question, really existing, and susceptible of actual

The mind the most unused to mathematical conceptions, in observing this
presents--namely, the _height_ from which a body has fallen, and the
they vary together, and simultaneously remain fixed; or, in the language
 The phenomenon,
question, which consists in substituting for the direct measurement of
the other.
depth of a precipice, by merely measuring the time that a heavy body
inaccessible depth will be known with as much precision as if it was a
exact measurement.
has fallen which it will be easy to ascertain, while the time of the
rise to the inverse question, namely, to determine the time from the
duration of the vertical fall of a body falling from the moon to the

In this example the mathematical question is very simple, at least when
the resistance of the fluid which the body passes through in its fall.
But, to extend the question, we have only to consider the same
and in taking into the account all the principal circumstances.
instead of offering simply two variable quantities connected with each
greater number; namely, the space traversed, whether in a vertical or
of the body at each point of its course; even the intensity and the
variables; and finally, in certain cases (to take every thing into the
 All
way that each in its turn may be indirectly determined by means of the
there may be co-existing magnitudes in the phenomenon under
 Such a very slight change in the physical conditions of a
first very elementary, to be placed at once in the rank of the most
yet the utmost power of the human intellect.

 _Inaccessible Distances.
geometrical phenomena.
is not susceptible of direct measurement; it will be generally conceived
a way that all its other parts may be observed directly; thus, in the
reduced, the proposed distance will be considered as belonging to a
angles, or two sides and one angle.
desired distance, instead of being obtained directly, will be the result
the observed elements by means of the relation which connects it with
 This calculation will become successively more and more
themselves be determined (as is most frequently the case) except in an
which, in great operations of this kind, finally becomes very
 The distance being once determined, the knowledge of it
become the subject of new mathematical questions.
what distance any object is situated, the simple observation of its
real dimensions, however inaccessible it may be, and, by a series of
a number of other properties, a knowledge of which seemed forbidden to

3.
_ It is by such calculations that man has been
and, consequently, from each other, but their actual magnitude, their
still more completely hidden from us, their respective masses, their
on the surface of each of them, &c.

many others relative to the different classes of mathematical phenomena,
number of straight lines, suitably chosen, and of a greater number of
 We may even say, with perfect truth, so as to indicate in a word
calculations unnecessarily, and if we had not, in consequence, to
measured directly, the determination of all the magnitudes susceptible
us, could be finally reduced to the direct measurement of a single



We are now able to define mathematical science with precision, by
and by saying it constantly proposes _to determine certain magnitudes

This enunciation, instead of giving the idea of only an _art_, as do all
and shows it at once to be composed of an immense chain of intellectual
series of intermediate links which it will be necessary to establish
measurement; of the number of variables coexistent in the proposed
magnitudes furnished by the phenomena under consideration.
such a definition, the spirit of mathematics consists in always
connected and interwoven with one another, with the view of deducing
 Now there is evidently no phenomenon which cannot
indefinite extent and even the rigorous logical universality of
 We shall seek farther on to circumscribe as

The preceding explanations establish clearly the propriety of the name
 This
signifies simply _science_ in general.
exact for the Greeks, who had no other real science, could be retained
all others--the science of sciences.

certain phenomena by means of others, in accordance with the relations
 Every _science_ consists in the co-ordination
would be no science.
is essentially destined to dispense, so far as the different phenomena
the smallest possible number of immediate data the greatest possible
 Is not this the real use, whether in speculation or
phenomena? Mathematical science, in this point of view, merely pushes to
pursued, in degrees more or less inferior, by every real science in its



We have thus far viewed mathematical science only as a whole, without
 We must now, in order to complete
character of the science, consider its fundamental division.
secondary divisions will be examined in the following chapters.

truly rational, and derived from the real nature of the subject, only so
analysis of a complete mathematical question.
determined above what is the general object of mathematical labours, now
of which they are constantly composed.

_ The complete solution of every mathematical
essentially distinct, and with relations invariably determinate.
seen that every mathematical inquiry has for its object to determine
magnitudes.
place, to ascertain with precision the relations which exist between the
 This first branch of inquiries
 When
question of numbers, consisting simply in determining unknown numbers,

the solution.
mathematical science into _two_ great sciences--ABSTRACT MATHEMATICS,

This analysis may be observed in every complete mathematical question,
 A single example will suffice

Taking up again the phenomenon of the vertical fall of a heavy body, and
determining, by means of one another, the height whence the body has
the exact relation of these two quantities, or, to use the language of
 Before this first
of one of these two magnitudes from the other would evidently be
 It is not enough to know vaguely
it is necessary to determine in what this dependence consists.
inquiry may be very difficult, and in fact, in the present case,
 The true
had ever remarked the increase of velocity which a body experiences in
our mind (always involuntarily inclined to suppose in every phenomenon
facility in conceiving them) would be naturally led, that the height was
 In a word, this first inquiry terminated in

When this _concrete_ part is completed, the inquiry becomes one of quite
 Knowing that the spaces passed through by the body in
numbers, we have then a problem purely numerical and _abstract_; to
consists in finding that the first of these two quantities, according to
power of the other; from which, finally, we have to calculate the value

In this example the concrete question is more difficult than the
 The reverse would be the case if we considered the same
object.
the second, of these two parts will constitute the principal difficulty
very simple, but very difficult to obtain, or it may be easy to
mathematical science, when we compare them as wholes, must be regarded
importance, as we shall show farther on, in considering each of them

_Their different Natures.
their _object_, as we have just seen, are no less so with regard to the

The first should be called _concrete_, since it evidently depends on the
examine new phenomena; while the second is completely independent of the
_numerical_ relations which they present, for which reason it should be
 The same relations may exist in a great number of
be viewed by the geometer as offering an analytical question

time of the vertical fall of a body in a vacuum, is found again in many
other; for it expresses the relation between the surface of a spherical
decrease of the intensity of light or of heat in relation to the
 The abstract part, common
reference to one of these, will thus have been treated for all; while
question separately, without the solution of any one of them being able

The abstract part of mathematics is, then, general in its nature; the

To present this comparison under a new point of view, we may say
experimental, physical, phenomenal; while that of abstract mathematics
 The concrete part of every mathematical
world, and could never be resolved by a simple series of intellectual
 The abstract part, on the contrary, when it has been very
deductions, more or less prolonged; for if we have once found the
considered, by means of one another, is a matter for reasoning only,
 It belongs to the understanding alone
them, although perhaps in a very involved manner, without there being
having become thenceforth foreign to the subject, ought even to be
difficulty.
instrumental, and is only an immense and admirable extension of natural
 On the other hand, geometry and
part, must be viewed as real natural sciences, founded on observation,
permits an infinitely greater degree of systematization, which has
first principles.

our fundamental division of mathematical science.

each of these two great sections.

CONCRETE MATHEMATICS.

_equations_ of phenomena, it would seem at first that it must be
categories among natural phenomena.
discovered mathematical laws in all kinds of phenomena; we shall even
themselves from our investigations.
of the human mind, there are directly but two great general classes of
geometrical, and, secondly, mechanical phenomena.
concrete part of mathematics is composed of GEOMETRY and RATIONAL

This is sufficient, it is true, to give to it a complete character of
elevated point of view of natural philosophy.
of the universe were conceived as immovable, we should evidently have
relations of form, magnitude, and position; then, having regard to the
mechanical phenomena.
presents only geometrical phenomena; and, considered dynamically, only
 Thus geometry and mechanics constitute the two
may be conceived as simple necessary results, either of the laws of

But although this conception is always logically possible, the
follow it exactly in each of the general cases offered to us by the
of natural philosophy, for a certain determinate order of phenomena, to
suppose it should be brought.
progress to have been previously made in the study of each class of
astronomy, and for a part of those considered by terrestrial physics,
 It is thus that astronomy, acoustics, optics, &c.
have finally become applications of mathematical science to certain
[1] But these applications not being by their
be to assign to it a vague and indefinite domain; and this is done in
mathematics into "Pure" and "Applied.

  laws of heat by Baron Fourier has led to the establishment, in an
 This great
  extensions of the legitimate applications of mathematical analysis,
  _Thermology_ as a third principal branch of concrete mathematics.

ABSTRACT MATHEMATICS.

be examined in the following chapter) is clearly and exactly determined.
It is composed of what is called the _Calculus_,[2] taking this word in
operations to the most sublime combinations of transcendental analysis.
The _Calculus_ has the solution of all questions relating to numbers
 Its _starting point_ is, constantly and
e.
_equations_, between the different magnitudes which are simultaneously
concrete mathematics.
relations may be, the final object of the calculus always is to obtain
are known.
really little advanced as yet, so that this object is rarely attained in

  [Footnote 2: The translator has felt justified in employing this
  equivalent) as an English one, in its most extended sense, in spite
  Integral department.

system of our actual knowledge.
perfect of all the fundamental sciences.
occupies itself are the most universal, the most abstract, and the most

This peculiar nature of mathematical analysis enables us easily to
instrument, not only to give more precision to our real knowledge, which
co-ordination in the study of the phenomena which admit of that
simplified that a single analytical question, abstractly resolved,
questions, the human mind must necessarily acquire by these means a
first appeared entirely distinct from one another.
arise, through the medium of analysis, the most frequent and the most
apparent connection, and which we often end in viewing as identical.
Could we, for example, without the aid of analysis, perceive the least
each of its points and that of the velocity acquired by a body at every
different they may be, compose but one in the eyes of the geometer.

perceptible.
nature of the signs which are employed as instruments of reasoning,
 In reality, all great
been of any essential aid, except for working them out after the mind
 The superior perfection of the science of the
it considers, by whatever signs they may be expressed; so that there is
perfecting to the same degree theories which refer to more complex
greater or less logical inferiority.

THE EXTENT OF ITS FIELD.

would remain incomplete, if, after having viewed its object and

_Its Universality_.
first of all, that, in the purely logical point of view, this science is
whatever which may not be finally conceived as consisting in determining
consequently as admitting of reduction, in final analysis, to a simple
 In all our researches, indeed, on whatever subject,
very imperfect manner and by very uncertain methods.
example in the class of subjects the least accessible to mathematics,
complicated case) in the state of disease, is it not manifest that all
the _quantities_ of the different agents which modify the organism, and
some of these quantities in certain cases, values which are equal to

abstract in mathematics, has proven, in opposition to the superficial
those of quantity.
author in relation to geometrical phenomena only, has since been
of heat.
geometers who do not consider it, in a purely theoretical sense, as
every phenomenon is logically susceptible of being represented by an
difficulty of discovering it, and then of _resolving_ it, which may be,

_Its Limitations_.
universality, in a logical point of view, of mathematical science, it is
which, through the feebleness of our intellect, narrow in a remarkable
special, become complicated.

question of numbers; but the difficulty of effecting such a
of natural philosophy, that it soon becomes insurmountable.

the field of mathematical analysis, we must first have discovered the
the phenomenon under examination, the establishment of these equations
 This must
which are more special, and therefore more complicated.
find that it is only in _inorganic physics_, at the most, that we can

The _first_ condition which is necessary in order that phenomena may
is, that their different quantities should admit of being expressed by
 We soon find that in this respect the whole of _organic
physics, are necessarily inaccessible, by their nature, to our
the corresponding phenomena.
truly out of place in the phenomena of living bodies, when we wish to
we attach any importance to the exact relations of the values assigned.

phenomena as being necessarily subject to mathematical laws, which we
complication of the phenomena.
bodies are doubtless essentially of no other special nature than the
 If it were possible to isolate
physiological phenomenon, every thing leads us to believe that it would
influence and with a quantity of action as exactly fixed as we see it in
nature.

under the dominion of mathematical analysis.
the mathematical law which governs each agent, taken by itself, the
corresponding mathematical problem so far above our feeble means, that

To appreciate this difficulty, let us consider how complicated
phenomena of unorganized bodies, when we desire to bring sufficiently
the principal conditions which can exercise a real influence over the
 We know, for example, that the very simple phenomenon
alone, has not as yet any complete mathematical solution, when we take
 It is the same even
medium.

admirable success to the most profound study of celestial phenomena?
any others.
modification produced in the motions of two bodies tending towards each
acting on both of them in the same manner, is much less complex than the
 And, nevertheless, even it presents
it.
astronomy has been able to elevate itself by the employment of
skilfully profited by all the particular, and, so to say, accidental
planetary system.
and their masses are in general very unequal, and much less than that of
forms almost spherical; their orbits are nearly circular, and only
 It results from all these
that to calculate them it is usually sufficient to take into the
planet, the influence of only one other planet, capable, by its size and

If, however, instead of such a state of things, our solar system had
space, and nearly equal in mass; if their orbits had presented very
had been of a more complicated form, such as very eccentric ellipsoids,
should not yet have succeeded in subjecting the study of the celestial
have been able to disentangle the present principal law.

the highest degree in _chemical_ phenomena, if we attempted to calculate

On properly weighing the preceding considerations, the reader will be
applications of mathematical analysis, which are really possible, to
have rather exaggerated than contracted the extent of its actual domain.
Important as it was to render apparent the rigorous logical universality
which limit for us its real extension, so as not to contribute to lead
the most complicated phenomena, by the chimerical search after an

       *       *       *       *       *
Having thus exhibited the essential object and the principal composition
body of natural philosophy, we have now to pass to the special

     _Note.
     the subject is about to be examined.
 Comte_ adds
     Mathematics, and as its discussion would be of but limited utility




ANALYSIS.


BOOK I.





GENERAL VIEW OF MATHEMATICAL ANALYSIS.

In the historical development of mathematical science since the time of
determined by those of its concrete portion; but it is none the less
to consider the Calculus in all its principal branches before proceeding
 Its analytical
mathematics, are in themselves essentially independent of the latter;
the former, without the aid of which they could make scarcely any
 Although the principal conceptions of analysis retain at
origin, they are now, however, mainly freed from that primitive
points; so that it is possible (especially since the labours of
method, in a single and continuous system.
undertaken in the present and the five following chapters, limiting our
branch of the science of the calculus.

discovery of the _equations_ which express the mathematical laws of the
true starting point of the calculus, which has for its object to obtain
think it indispensable, before proceeding any farther, to go more deeply
continual subject, either as end or as beginning, of all mathematical
 Besides the advantage of circumscribing more definitely the
consequence of tracing in a more exact manner the real line of
which will complete the general exposition of the fundamental division





give that name to every kind of relation of equality between _any_ two
 For, though every
that, reciprocally, every relation of equality is a veritable
of analysis are applicable.

so fundamental in mathematics, brings with it the serious inconvenience
great and fundamental difficulty which we find in establishing the
prominently in each great mathematical question taken by itself.
meaning of the word _equation_ was truly as extended as we habitually
difficulty there could really be, in general, in establishing the
consist in a simple question of form, which ought never even to exact
any precise relation which is not immediately a certain relation of
transformations.

_equations_, we do not at all account for the extreme difficulty which
which so often may be compared to the efforts required by the analytical
 In a word, the ordinary
the real meaning which geometers attach to that expression in the actual
 Here, then, is a logical fault, a defect of


_ To succeed in doing
analytical functions, and _concrete_ functions.
enter into veritable _equations_.
every _equation_, in an exact and sufficiently profound manner, as a
under consideration.
fundamental definition, I must add here, as an indispensable complement,
abstract functions may refer not only to the magnitudes which the
magnitudes which are connected with it, and which we will often be able
facilitating the discovery of the equations of the phenomena.
anticipate summarily the result of a general discussion of the highest
 We will now
concrete.

but complementary of each other, _à priori_ and _à posteriori_; that is
each species of functions, and then by making the actual enumeration of
to the elements of which they are composed.

express a manner of dependence between magnitudes, which can be
any phenomenon whatever in which it is realized.
hand, _concrete_ functions, those for which the mode of dependence
determinate case of physics, geometry, mechanics, &c.
actually exists.

purely _abstract_, have begun by being _concrete_; so that it is easy to
different points of view under which, in proportion as the science has
functions.
become abstract functions only since the labours of Vieta and Descartes.
The functions _x²_, _x³_, which in our present analysis are so well
perfectly _concrete_ functions, expressing the relation of the
side.
was only by means of the geometrical definitions that they discovered
decomposition of the variable into two parts, properties which were at
was not attached until long afterward.

example, very suitable to make apparent the fundamental distinction
direct and inverse, which at the present time are still sometimes
which they are regarded.

or concrete having been established, the question as to whether a
susceptible of entering into true analytical equations, becomes a simple
functions of this species.

_Enumeration of Abstract Functions.
seems impossible, the distinct analytical functions being infinite in
 But when we divide them into _simple_ and _compound_, the
considered in mathematical analysis is really infinite, they are, on the
elementary functions, which can be easily assigned, and which are
any given function; which will be of the one or the other nature,
functions, or as it shall include others.

single variable, since those relative to several independent variables

Let _x_ be the independent variable, _y_ the correlative variable which
 The different simple modes of abstract dependence,
following elementary formulas, in which each function is coupled with
direct function by referring _x_ to _y_, instead of referring _y_ to

            FUNCTION.

1st couple {1° _y_ = _a_ + _x_             _Sum.
           {2° _y_ = _a_ - _x_             _Difference.

_
_
3d couple  {1° _y_ = _x^a_                 _Power.
           {2° _y_ = _[ath root]x_            _Root.

_
_
5th couple {1° _y_ = sin.
_
 = _x_).
_[3]
  [Footnote 3: With the view of increasing as much as possible the
  analysis, geometers count this last couple of functions among the
 Although this inscription is strictly
  not exactly in the same situation as the other abstract elementary
 There is this very essential difference, that the
  abstract, while the circular functions, which may manifest each
  they are considered and the manner in which they are employed,

  Some other concrete functions may be usefully introduced into the

 Legendre and of M.
  Jacobi on _elliptical_ functions have truly enlarged the field of
  by M.
]
Such are the elements, very few in number, which directly compose all
 Few as they are, they
analytical combinations.

preceding table, which is only the actual expression of the present
 Our analytical elements are at the present day
Leibnitz: it is only a century since the last two couples have been

towards the end of this chapter, we cannot hope that they will ever be
difficulties.

idea of what geometers understand by a veritable _equation_.
explanation is especially suited to make us understand how difficult it
effectually succeeded in so doing only when we have been able to
functions entirely composed of only the mathematical elements which I
 It is clear, in fact, that it is then only that
numbers, these functions being the only simple relations which we can
 Up to this period of
essentially concrete, and does not come within the domain of the
 Now the fundamental difficulty of this passage from the
insufficiency of this very small number of analytical elements which we
real variety which they offer us, we must succeed in representing all
manifest to us.
necessarily exist in this respect in the external world, we easily
frequently be found, especially if we add that as these elements of our
mathematical consideration of the simplest phenomena, we have, _à
represent the mathematical law of every other class of phenomena.
explain presently the general artifice, so profoundly ingenious, by
degree, this fundamental difficulty which is presented by the relation
having been necessary to multiply the number of these analytical





the real field of abstract mathematics.
examination of its principal divisions, for thus far we have considered

The first direct consideration to be presented on the composition of the
into two principal branches, to which, for want of more suitable
_Algebra_, and of _Arithmetical calculus_, or _Arithmetic_; but with
acceptation, in the place of the by far too restricted meaning which is

The complete solution of every question of the _calculus_, from the most
successive parts, whose nature is essentially distinct.
the object is to transform the proposed equations, so as to make
known ones: it is this which constitutes the _algebraic_ question.
the second, our object is to _find the values_ of the formulas thus
sought, which are already represented by certain explicit functions of
[4] It is apparent
the algebraical question, of which it forms the indispensable
generation of the numbers sought for before determining their actual
 Thus the stopping-place of the
arithmetical part.

  following equation between an unknown magnitude x, and two known


 We see
  the other, is completely determined; but, so long as the equation
  manner the unknown quantity is derived from the data.
  discovered, however, before we can think of determining its value.
  Such is the object of the algebraic part of the solution.
  series of transformations which have successively rendered that
  proposed equation under the form
  _x_ = ∛(_b_ + √(_b²_ + _a³_)) + ∛(_b_ - √(_b²_ + _a³_)),
  the work of _algebra_ is finished; and even if we could not perform
  nevertheless have obtained a knowledge very real, and often very
 The work of _arithmetic_ will now consist in taking that
  values of the numbers _a_ and _b_ are given.

calculus differ essentially in their object.
point of view under which they regard quantities; which are considered
_values_.
distinction to be maintained with the most severe exactitude, and the
rendered as clear and distinct as the proposed question permits.
attentive observation of this precept, which is too much neglected, may
efforts of our mind, at any moment of the solution, towards the real
 In truth, the imperfection of the science of
chapter) to intermingle algebraic and arithmetical considerations in the
 But, however impossible it may be to
indications will always enable us to avoid confounding them.

established, we see that ALGEBRA may be defined, in general, as having
its full logical meaning, which signifies the transformation of
 In the same way,
values of functions_.
ALGEBRA is the _Calculus of Functions_, and ARITHMETIC the _Calculus of

We can now perceive how insufficient and even erroneous are the ordinary
 Most generally, the exaggerated importance attributed to
science of the Calculus by the manner of designating in each the
and false in fact.
characterizing _Algebra_ as _Universal Arithmetic_, gives certainly a
[5]
  [Footnote 5: I have thought that I ought to specially notice this
  many intelligent persons, unacquainted with mathematical science,
  this definition mathematical analysis was not sufficiently
  parts to be properly apprehended, which explains why Newton could
  certainly reject.

two principal branches, I have now to compare in general terms the
calculus, so as to have hereafter to consider only the _Calculus of





_ The _Calculus of Values, or Arithmetic_, would appear, at
would seem to admit as many distinct questions as we can conceive
 But a
 Dividing functions into
determine the _value_ of simple functions, the consideration of compound
 In the algebraic point
the elementary functions of which it consists, and from this, indeed,
 But it is very
 Thus the number of truly
of the elementary abstract functions, the very limited list of which has
 The determination of the values of these ten functions
are considered in the whole of mathematical analysis, such at least as
 There can be no new arithmetical operations
which must always be extremely small.
then, by its nature, exceedingly restricted, while that of algebra is

It is, however, important to remark, that the domain of the _calculus of
represented; for several questions truly _arithmetical_, since they
because we are accustomed to treat them only as incidental in the midst
opinion commonly formed of the influence of signs being again the
 Thus not only the
trigonometrical tables, are true arithmetical operations of a higher
 We may also cite as being in the same class, although in a very
directly the value of any function for each particular system of values
in general terms the explicit form of that function.
view the _numerical_ solution of questions which we cannot resolve
general integrals we do not know, really make a part, in spite of all
comprise all that which has for its object the _determination of the
 The considerations relative to this object are, in
and are always very distinct from truly _algebraic_ considerations.

must include in it likewise that part of the general science of the
is yet so little advanced.
but whose importance in the general system of science is not very
different numbers by virtue of their values, and independent of any
 It forms, then, a sort of
proposed by Newton for algebra.

commonly supposed; but this _calculus of values_ will still never be
functions_, of which mathematical science essentially consists.
comparative estimate will be still more apparent from some
of arithmetical questions in general, when they are more profoundly


_ In seeking to determine with precision in what
they are nothing else but veritable _transformations_ of the functions
none the less essentially of the same nature as all those taught by
 In this point of view, the _calculus of values_ might be
_calculus of functions_, so that _arithmetic_ would disappear, so to

In order thoroughly to comprehend this consideration, we must observe
whose mode of formation is given, it is, by the mere enunciation of the
form; and that in _determining its value_ we only put its expression
exact notion of each particular number by making it re-enter into the
 The determination of values consists so
expression of the number is found to be already conformed to the regular
properly speaking, or, rather, the question is answered by the question
 Let the question be to add the two numbers _one_ and _twenty_,
nevertheless we think that we have _determined the value_ of the sum.
This signifies that in this case the first expression of the function
twenty-three and fourteen, for then the sum would not be immediately
fixed and general scale of numeration.

  [Footnote 6: This is less strictly true in the English system of
  mode of expressing this number.

say, that to determine the _value_ of a number is nothing else than

 .
 .
 + _pz^m_,
_z_ being generally equal to 10, and the coefficients _a_, _b_, _c_,
, being subjected to the conditions of being whole numbers less
 Every
such a form any abstract function whatever of different quantities,
 We might
particular cases of certain algebraic transformations, excepting the
the coefficients.

the _Calculus of Functions_, which had been already seen to be its most
 It will henceforth be
 I will therefore
examination of the fundamental division of the _Calculus of Functions_.


THE CALCULUS OF FUNCTIONS, OR ALGEBRA.

_Principle of its Fundamental Division.
beginning of this chapter, wherein properly consists the difficulty

of analytical elements which we possess, that the relation of the
 Let us
process by which the human mind has succeeded, in so great a number of
establishment of Equations_.

1.
_ In looking at this important
conception of one means of facilitating the establishment of the
 Since the principal obstacle in this matter
question would seem to be reduced to creating new ones.
though natural, is really illusory; and though it might be useful, it is

In fact, the creation of an elementary abstract function, which shall be
 There is
element would evidently not fulfil its essential and appropriate
 Now, on
which is truly _simple_, that is, which is not formed by a combination
 The introduction
another couple of functions (for each would be always accompanied by its
new arithmetical operation, which is certainly very difficult.

employs for inventing new analytical elements, by the examination of the
already possess, our observations leave us in that respect in an entire
purpose are evidently exhausted.
consider the last couple of simple functions which has been introduced
to speak, namely, the fourth couple; for, as I have explained, the fifth
 The
conceiving, under a new point of view, a function which had been a long
sufficiently generalized.
variation of its exponent, instead of to the variation of its base, was
following then an entirely different route.
as ingenious, can furnish nothing more; for, in turning over in the same
return into one another.

elementary abstract functions which would properly satisfy all the
 This is not to say, however, that we have at
bounds of our intelligence.
improvements in mathematical analysis have contributed to extend our
calculus certain definite integrals, which in some respects supply the
the necessary conditions, which has prevented me from inserting them in
 But, on the whole, I think it
with extreme slowness.
human mind has drawn its most powerful means of facilitating, as much


 _By the Conception of Equations between certain auxiliary
_ This first method being set aside, there remains evidently
equations between the quantities under consideration, to seek for
the first according to a certain determinate law, and from the relation

human mind has succeeded in establishing, and which constitutes its most
phenomena; the _analysis_, called _transcendental_.

are introduced in the place of the primitive magnitudes, or concurrently
be derived according to any law whatever from the immediate elements of
 This conception has thus a much more extensive reach than

for it will perhaps be by establishing a general mode of _derivation_
(although it is evidently very far from being the only possible one)
analysis as a whole, and consequently in establishing more powerful
which are unquestionably susceptible of becoming exhausted.

auxiliary quantities habitually introduced in the place of the primitive
_infinitely small_ elements, the _differentials_ (of different orders)
LEIBNITZ; or, 2⁰, the _fluxions_, the limits of the ratios of the
another, or, more briefly, the _prime and ultimate ratios_ of these
_derivatives_, properly so called, of those quantities, that is, the
according to the conception of LAGRANGE.

analysis, and all the other less distinctly characterized ones which
identical, whether in the calculation or in the application, as will be
 As to their relative
in practice, an incontestable superiority, but that its logical
admirable by its simplicity, by its logical perfection, by the
(till then separated into two almost entirely independent worlds),
retarding the progress of the mind.
nearly middle ground in these various relations, being less rapid, but
applicable than that of Lagrange.

this kind of auxiliary quantities in the place of the primitive
 The third chapter is devoted to this subject.
limit myself to consider this conception in the most general manner, in
functions_ into two systems essentially distinct, whose dependence, for
determinate.

analysis presents itself as being necessarily the first, since its
operation which must evidently precede the _resolution_ of those
 But though it
these two systems of analysis, it is none the less proper, in conformity
ordinary analysis; for though the former is, at bottom, by itself
disengaged from it, yet it is clear that, since its employment in the
the use of the ordinary analysis, we would be constrained to leave the


_ It follows from
_Algebra_ (taking this word in its most extended meaning), is composed
object the _resolution_ of equations, when they are directly established
other, starting from equations (generally much easier to form) between
peculiar and constant destination the deduction, by invariable
magnitudes which we are considering; which brings the question within

The former calculus bears most frequently the name of _Ordinary
 The second constitutes
by the different denominations of _Infinitesimal Calculus_, _Calculus of
_Differential and Integral Calculus_, &c.
view in which it has been conceived.

it CALCULUS OF INDIRECT FUNCTIONS, giving to ordinary analysis the title
 These expressions, which I form
simply intended to indicate with precision the true general character

Having now established the fundamental division of mathematical
commencing with the _Calculus of Direct Functions_, and reserving more
Indirect Functions_.


CHAPTER II.



the end of the preceding chapter) entirely sufficient for the solution
directly the equations between the magnitudes themselves which we are
conjointly with them, any system of auxiliary quantities _derived_ from
 It is true that in the greatest number of important cases its
indirect Functions_, which is intended to facilitate the establishment
 But, although algebra has then only a secondary office to
of the question, so that the _Calculus of direct Functions_ must
analysis.
general manner the logical composition of this calculus, and the degree


_ The final object of this calculus being the _resolution_
manner in which the unknown quantities are formed from the known
it naturally presents as many different departments as we can conceive
 Its appropriate extent is
susceptible of entering into equations being in itself quite unlimited,
elements.

_Classification of Equations.
must evidently be determined by the nature of the analytical elements of
essentially arbitrary.
with one or more variables into two principal classes, according as they
chapter i.
functions.
functions, commonly given to these two principal groups of analytical
 But the universally
less very real in this sense, that the resolution of equations
more difficulties than those of the equations called _algebraic_.
the study of the former is as yet exceedingly imperfect, so that
us,[7] and our analytical methods have almost exclusive reference to the

  [Footnote 7: Simple as may seem, for example, the equation
  _a^x_ + _b^x_ = _c^x_,
  we do not yet know how to resolve it, which may give some idea of
]




the first place, that although they may often contain _irrational_
can always, by more or less easy transformations, make the first case
had to occupy themselves exclusively in order to resolve all sorts of


_ In the infancy of algebra, these equations were
 But this classification
similar, and brought together others which had nothing in common besides
[8] It has been retained only for
in a manner peculiar to themselves.

  of the infinitesimal calculus, in relation to the integration of
]
The classification of equations by what is called their _degrees_, is,
determines the greater or less difficulty of their _resolution_.
gradation is apparent in the cases of all the equations which can be
the fact of the resolution.
equation of each degree necessarily comprehends all those of the
the unknown quantity.
difficulty peculiar to the _degree_ which we are considering, since it
the preceding degrees, the resolution really offers more and more





_ The resolution of algebraic equations is as yet known to
noticed above.
progress since the labours of Descartes and the Italian analysts of the
perhaps scarcely a single geometer who has not busied himself in trying
 The general equation of the

The constantly increasing complication which the formulas for resolving
increases (the difficulty of using the formula of the fourth degree
by a tacit agreement, the pursuit of such researches, although they are
equations of the fifth degree, and of several other higher ones.

_General Solution.
of great importance, at least in its logical relations, would be the
 Now,
Lagrange, that it really surpasses the scope of our intelligence.
must besides observe that the formula which would express the _root_ of
the _m^{th}_ order (or functions of an equivalent multiplicity), because
 Since we have seen,
formula which corresponds to every lower degree, it follows that it
next lower to that, &c.
it, it would almost always present too great a complication to be
simplifying it, at the same time retaining all its generality, by the
no idea.
here arrived at the limits imposed by the feeble extent of our
earnestly prolonged this series of investigations.

obtained the resolution of _algebraic_ equations of any degree whatever,
properly so called, that is, of the calculus of direct functions,
known analytical functions.

our means for conceiving new questions being much more powerful than our
much more ready to inquire than to reason, we shall necessarily always
our intellectual labour may arrive.
discover the complete resolution of all the analytical equations at
that, before attaining this end, and probably even as a subsidiary
one, though still very great) of conceiving new analytical elements, the
at present, we are completely ignorant; so that a similar imperfection
real and very important increase of the absolute mass of our knowledge.

_What we know in Algebra.
complete resolution of the equations of the first four degrees, of any
degrees, and of a very small number of exponential, logarithmic, or
presented by the calculus of direct functions for the solution of
 But, limited as these elements are, geometers
very great number of important questions, as we shall find in the course
 The general improvements introduced within a century into
object to make immeasurably useful this little knowledge which we have,
 This result has been so fully
complete solution of the question, except by its most simple parts;
one or more variables.


NUMERICAL RESOLUTION OF EQUATIONS.

The extreme imperfection of algebra, with respect to the resolution of
questions, whose true character should be here noted.
themselves in filling up the immense gap in the resolution of algebraic
resolution_ of equations.
_formula_ which expresses what explicit function of the given quantities
resolution, the only one really _algebraic_) to determine, independently
various designated systems of particular values attributed to the given
 By the successive labours of analysts, this incomplete and
algebraic questions with others which are purely arithmetical, has been
any form.
general, although the calculations to which they lead are often so
 We have
methods sufficiently to render them regularly applicable, which we may
 In this condition of the calculus of direct
questions as finally to require only this numerical resolution of the


_ Valuable as is such a resource in the absence
character of these methods, which analysts rightly regard as a very
 In fact, we are far from being always able to reduce
resolution of equations; that can be done only for questions quite
 Most
indispensable preparation for the solution of other questions.
such an object, it is evident that it is not the actual _value_ of the
which shows how it is derived from the other quantities under
 It is this which happens, for example, in a very
same time several unknown quantities.
separate them.
happily invented by analysts, and which consists in referring all the
disappear if we knew how to obtain the algebraic resolution of the
be perfectly useless.
resolution of equations with a single unknown quantity, that we are
of the greatest special difficulties of common algebra.
the methods by the aid of which we overcome this difficulty, they are
of one unknown quantity between two equations of any form whatever.

single equation with a single unknown quantity, this _numerical_
strictly sufficient.
obliging us to repeat the whole series of operations for the slightest
considered, although their relations to one another remain unchanged;
of those which relate to a case very slightly different.
because of our inability to abstract and treat separately that purely
result from the mere variation of the given numbers.

functions, viewed in its present state, divides into two very distinct
equations or their _numerical_ resolution.
only one truly satisfactory, is unhappily very limited, and will
least, the advantage of a much greater generality.
clearly distinguishing these two parts is evident, because of the
peculiar point of view under which quantities are therein considered.

_Different Divisions of the two Methods of Resolution.
consider these parts with reference to the different methods of which
different arrangement.
to the nature of the equations which we are able to resolve, and
unknown quantities.
according to the _degrees_ of the equations that the methods are
degree whatever; it is according to the numerical character of the
directly, without deducing them from general formulas, different means
having their values determined otherwise than by a series of
entire exactness.
_commensurable_ roots, which require quite different principles for
equations, is entirely insignificant in the algebraic resolution, in
obtained is a mere accident of the calculation, which cannot exercise
arithmetical consideration.
of the division of the commensurable roots themselves into _entire_ and
 In fine, the case is the same, in a still greater degree,
_imaginary_.
as to the numerical resolution of equations, and which are of no
the essentially distinct nature of these two principal parts of algebra.


THE THEORY OF EQUATIONS.

These two departments, which constitute the immediate object of the
speculative, from which both of them borrow their most powerful
name of _Theory of Equations_, although it as yet relates only to
 The numerical resolution of equations, because of

This last and important branch of algebra is naturally divided into two
, those which refer to the _composition_ of
having for their object to modify the roots of an equation without
is uniform in relation to all the parts.

  of equations, and which is so frequently applied in all
  and entire functions, of any degree whatever, into factors of the
  variable, without any one having examined if it ought to be
 The general
  in detail, but more properly belongs to a special treatise.


THE METHOD OF INDETERMINATE COEFFICIENTS.

To complete this rapid general enumeration of the different essential
expressly one of the most fruitful and important theories of algebra
the aid of what is called the _Method of indeterminate Coefficients_.
This method, so eminently analytical, and which must be regarded as one
some of its importance since the invention and the development of the
some particular respects.
transcendental analysis, although it has rendered this method much less
enlarged its resources; so that by the useful combination between the
indeterminate coefficients has become at present much more extensive
functions.


to offer some considerations on several leading points in the calculus
clear by a philosophical examination.


IMAGINARY QUANTITIES.

The difficulties connected with several peculiar symbols to which
called _imaginary_, have been, I think, much exaggerated through purely
place of regarding these abnormal results in their true point of view as
 Viewing them thus, we readily see that, since
in reference to their relations only, and without any regard to their
kind of expression which can be engendered by algebraic combinations.
The interdiction of even one expression because of its apparent
 The
from an unconscious confusion between the idea of _function_ and the
_algebraic_ and the _arithmetical_ point of view.
would show mathematical analysis to be much more clear in its nature





discussions, as irrational as useless, we must distinguish between their
been almost always confounded up to the present day.
point of view, the theory of negative quantities can be established in a
 The necessity of
above indicated; and their employment as an analytical artifice, to
which cannot really give rise to any serious difficulty.
therefore regard the abstract theory of negative quantities as leaving
inappropriately introduced by sophistical considerations.

 This
representing analytically the oppositions of directions of which certain
 This _general theorem_ on the relation of
discoveries which we owe to the genius of Descartes, who obtained it as
 A great
demonstration, but thus far their efforts have been illusory.
metaphysical considerations and heterogeneous minglings of the abstract
to here distinctly enunciate the general fact.
in any equation whatever, expressing the relation of certain quantities
quantities come to be reckoned in a direction contrary to that which
necessary to form directly a new equation for this second state of the
each of the quantities which shall have changed its direction; and the
we would have arrived at in recommencing to investigate, for this new
 The general theorem consists
 Now, as yet, no one has
by a great number of geometrical and mechanical verifications, which
varied, to prevent any clear mind from having the least doubt of the
a philosophical point of view, do not at all dispense with the research
 The extreme extent of the theorem must
and the high utility for the perfecting of mathematical science which
 This
the most extensive and the most important use of this property in all

It follows from the above general enunciation of the fact, independently
applied to magnitudes whose directions are continually varying, without
with which every result of calculation is necessarily affected is not
made to establish one are erroneous.
other occasions, in the case of a radius vector in geometry, and





is that which is ordinarily designated under the name of _Principle of
 It is undoubtedly much less important in its applications
by its nature, a still greater extent, since it is applicable to all
often possesses for the verification of their analytical laws.
moreover, exhibit a direct and general demonstration of it which seems
 It is founded on this single observation, which is
magnitudes whatsoever is independent of the value of the _units_ to

right-angled triangle is the same, whether they are measured by yards,

It follows from this general consideration, that every equation which
property of being in no way altered, when all the quantities which are
to that which their respective units would experience.
evidently consists in all the quantities of each sort becoming at once
times greater, or reciprocally.
concrete relation whatever must possess this characteristic of remaining
contains, and which express the magnitudes between which the relation
_ratios_ of these different magnitudes, and which therefore remain
 It is this property which
that is, of whatever analytical functions the equations may be composed.

are such as are called _algebraic_, and to which the idea of _degree_ is
 In this case we can give more precision to the general
necessarily presented by the equation, in order that this property may
 It is easy to see, then, that, by the modification just
form, rational or irrational, entire or fractional, will become _m_
third, _m³_ times, &c.
different may be their composition, varying in the same manner, and the
similarity there may be in their composition, it will be necessary, to
contains should be of the same degree.
consists the ordinary theorem of _Homogeneity_, and it is from this
ceases to be exactly proper for all other functions.

observe an essential condition, to which attention must be paid in
presents magnitudes of different natures.
respective units are completely independent of each other, and then the
corresponding classes of quantities, or with regard to only a single one
 But it will happen on other occasions that the
the nature of the question; then it will be necessary to pay attention
will not exist any longer in a purely algebraic sense, and the precise
 Thus,
geometrical phenomena, we are considering at once lines, areas, and
units are necessarily so connected with each other that, according to
becomes _m_ times greater, the second becomes _m²_ times, and the third
 It is with such a modification that homogeneity will exist
estimate the degree of each term by doubling the exponents of the
relating to volumes.


of Direct Functions_.
examination of the _Calculus of Indirect Functions_, the much superior




TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYSIS:
DIFFERENT MODES OF VIEWING IT.

We determined, in the second chapter, the philosophical character of the
considering only the general nature of its actual destination as a part
 This analysis has been presented by geometers
equivalent, and leading always to identical results.
to three principal ones; those of LEIBNITZ, of NEWTON, and of LAGRANGE,
 In the present
essential advantages which pertain to it exclusively, without our having
different characteristic qualities.
hereafter effected by some method founded upon the conception of
accomplished, the study of the other conceptions will have only a
only a provisional state, which requires the simultaneous consideration
 Illogical as may
without them all, we could form but a very insufficient idea of this
applications.
mathematical analysis will not appear strange if we consider, on the one
its recent formation.


ITS EARLY HISTORY.

If we had to trace here the systematic history of the successive
previously to distinguish carefully from the _calculus of indirect
method_, which can be conceived by itself, independently of any
 We should see that the first germ of this idea is found in
of the _Method of Exhaustions_, as a means of passing from the
essentially in substituting for the curve the auxiliary consideration of
the curve itself, taking in a suitable manner the limits of the
 Incontestable as is this filiation of ideas, it would
exhaustions the real equivalent of our modern methods, as some geometers
determination of these limits, and this was commonly the greatest
to abstract and invariable rules, the uniform application of which would
the principal characteristic of our transcendental analysis.
there still remained the task of generalizing the conceptions used by
abstract, of reducing it to a complete system of calculation, which to

The first idea which was produced in this new direction goes back to the
blocked out the direct formation of the transcendental analysis by his
finding of _tangents_, which consisted essentially in introducing the
variables, increments afterward suppressed as equal to zero when the
 But, although
manner, it was yet far from being regularly formed into a general and
superfluous consideration of terms which, in the analysis of Fermat,
greatly complicated all the operations by their presence.
Leibnitz so happily executed, half a century later, after some
and still more by Barrow; and he has thus been the true creator of the
 This admirable
intellect at the moment of their manifestation), that Newton, on his
exactly equivalent, by considering this analysis under a very different
adapted to give to the common fundamental method all the extent and the

had guided Leibnitz and Newton, has succeeded in reducing the
algebraic system, which only wants more aptitude for its practical

After this summary glance at the general history of the transcendental
principal conceptions, in order to appreciate exactly their
methods which are thence derived.





_ This consists in introducing into the
infinitely small elements of which all the quantities, the relations
 These elements
constantly and necessarily more simple and easy to discover than those
(by a special calculus having for its peculiar object the elimination of
which it would have been most frequently impossible to obtain directly.
This indirect analysis may have different degrees of indirectness; for,
between the differentials of the magnitudes under consideration, a
and these differentials be treated, in their turn, as new primitive
elements (which, with reference to the final objects of the question,
admitting of being repeated any number of times, on the condition of
quantities introduced as auxiliaries.

once how the employment of these auxiliary quantities can facilitate the
increments of the proposed magnitudes being of the same species with
more ease, inasmuch as the greater or less value of a quantity cannot,
independent, by its nature, of every idea of value.
nevertheless, to explain very clearly, and in a quite general manner,
 For this
of infinitely small quantities, a very precise idea of which may be
the same primitive infinitely small quantity, or as being quantities
that, to take an example, the second, third, &c.
one variable are classed as infinitely small quantities of the second
, because it is easy to discover in them finite
, powers of a certain first
 These preliminary ideas being established, the spirit of
infinitely small quantities in comparison with finite quantities, and
comparison with all those of an inferior order.
how much such a liberty must facilitate the formation of equations
differentials, we can substitute such other elements as we may choose,
this single condition, that the new elements differ from the preceding
 It is
composed of an infinity of rectilinear elements, curved surfaces as
infinite series of uniform motions, succeeding one another at infinitely


 Considering the importance of this admirable conception, I
character by the summary indication of some leading examples.

1.
_ Let it be required to determine, for each point of a
tangent; a question whose general solution was the primitive object of
 We will consider the
and then, designating by _dy_ and _dx_ the infinitely small differences
geometry will immediately give the equation _t_ = _dy_/_dx_ for the
abscissas by the desired tangent, this being the most simple way of
 This
reduced to a simple analytical problem, which will consist in
auxiliaries, by determining in each particular case, by means of the
constantly done by uniform and very simple methods.

2.
_ In the second place, suppose that we wish
the co-ordinates of its extremities.
directly the equation between this arc s and these co-ordinates, while
of these different magnitudes.
geometry will in fact give at once, considering the infinitely small arc


 In either case,
the elimination of the differentials (which is the peculiar object of
relation to that which exists between the finite quantities themselves


 _Quadrature of a Curve.
curvilinear areas.
rectilinear co-ordinates, we will conceive the area A comprised between
increase by an infinitely small quantity _d_A, as the result of a
 The relation between these two
substituting for the curvilinear element of the proposed area the
abscissa, from which it evidently differs only by an infinitely small
 This will at once give, whatever may be


functions will show how to deduce the finite equation, which is the


 _Velocity in Variable Motion.
desire to know the expression for the velocity acquired at each instant
consider the motion as being uniform during an infinitely small element
equation _de_ = _vdt_, in which _v_ designates the velocity acquired
to deduce, by simple and invariable analytical procedures, the formula
with the corresponding relation between the time and the space; or,
the velocity was supposed to be known, whether with respect to the space


 _Distribution of Heat.
questions, it is by similar steps that we are able, in the study of

equation which expresses the variable distribution of heat in any body
easily-obtained relation, which represents the uniform distribution of
every other body as decomposed into infinitely small elements of a
an infinitely small element of time.
can be presented by abstract thermology will be reduced, as in geometry
consist in the elimination of the differentials introduced as

Examples of such different natures are more than sufficient to give a
the transcendental analysis as formed by Leibnitz, constituting, as it
yet attained.

foundation of mathematical science, by enabling us to establish, in a

great fundamental idea of Descartes on the general analytical
worthily appreciated and suitably employed till after the formation of
geometry, very important results.

_Generality of the Formulas.
given by the transcendental analysis for the investigation of the
property, perhaps as important as the first, is the extreme generality
determinate phenomenon, however varied the subjects in relation to which
 Thus we see, in the preceding examples, that a single
rectifications, a third their quadratures; and in the same way, one
motion; and, finally, a single equation constantly represents the
 This generality,
of the most elevated considerations, is a fortunate and necessary
especially in the conception of Leibnitz.
analysis has not only furnished a general method for indirectly forming
manner, but it has also permitted us to consider, for the mathematical
nevertheless present a clear and precise signification to every mind
 By virtue of this second
as geometry or mechanics, has been condensed into a small number of
and invariable rules, the solution of all particular problems.

_Demonstration of the Method.
conception of Leibnitz, there remains to be considered the demonstration
the most imperfect part of this beautiful method.

geometers rightly attached more importance to extending the immortal
rigorously establishing the logical bases of its operations.
contented themselves for a long time by answering the objections of
problems; doubtless persuaded that in mathematical science, much more
rational explanation is imperfect, provided they are fruitful in
would not permit any error to remain long undiscovered.
of things could not long exist, and it was necessary to go back to the
perfectly general manner, the rigorous exactitude of the procedures
ordinary rules of reasoning which it permitted.

erroneous, saying that he treated infinitely small quantities as
quantities, "like grains of sand in comparison with the sea:" a view
reducing it to a mere approximative calculus, which, under this point of
foresee, in general, to what degree the successive operations might
amount.
the true logical foundations of the analysis which he had created.
earliest successors limited themselves, at first, to verifying its
applications, to those obtained by ordinary algebra or the geometry of
they were able, the solutions of some problems after they had been once
in the first place.

geometers, instead of directly attacking the difficulty, preferred to
by demonstrating the necessary and constant conformity of the conception
conceptions of the transcendental analysis, that of Newton especially,
 Such a general
uncertainty as to the legitimate employment of the analysis of Leibnitz.
But the infinitesimal method is so important--it offers still, in almost
general conceptions which have been successively proposed--that there
science if it could not justify itself, and needed to be logically
employed.

manner the necessary rationality of the infinitesimal method.
various attempts more or less imperfect, a distinguished geometer,
method of Leibnitz, by showing it to be founded on the principle of the
luminous manifestation of what Leibnitz had vaguely and confusedly
 Carnot has thus rendered the science an essential service,
logical scaffolding of the infinitesimal method, properly so called, is
it is radically vicious in its nature.
notice the general system of reasoning proposed by Carnot, in order to
 Here is the substance of

substitute, for the immediate elements of the different quantities
infinitely little in comparison with them; and this substitution
without it would possess no real facility for the formation of
 Carnot regards such an hypothesis as really producing an
_imperfect_; only, it is clear that this error must be infinitely small.
Now, on the other hand, all the analytical operations, whether of
differential equations, in order to raise them to finite equations by
auxiliaries, produce as constantly, by their nature, as is easily seen,
the final equations, in the words of Carnot, become _perfect_.
views, as a certain and invariable indication of the actual
of the various infinitely small quantities, which is always, in fact,
for if we have committed no other infractions of the general rules of
infinitesimal method, the infinitely small errors thus produced cannot
and the relations are necessarily of a rigorous exactitude as soon as
possible must be finite ones, while none such can have entered.
general reasoning is founded on the conception of infinitesimal
they are derived are regarded as fixed.

_Illustration by Tangents.
by a single example, let us take up again the question of _tangents_,
 We will regard the
infinitely small error, since it would be perfectly rigorous only for
 Now let us complete the solution by seeking, according to
co-ordinates.
evidently have
  _dy_ = 2_axdx_ + _adx²_.

small quantity of the second order.
_imperfect_ equations.


result, _t_ = 2_ax_, will necessarily be rigorously correct, from the
its finite nature, it cannot be affected by an infinitely small error,
to the spirit of the operations which have been executed.

with reference to all the other general applications of the analysis of

This ingenious theory is undoubtedly more subtile than solid, when we
fault than that of the infinitesimal method itself, of which it is, it
that it must be adopted for as long a time as it shall be thought proper

       *       *       *       *       *
I pass now to the general exposition of the two other fundamental
its principal idea, the philosophical character of the analysis having
of Leibnitz, which I have specially dwelt upon because it admits of





transcendental analysis under several different forms.
present the most commonly adopted was designated by Newton, sometimes
under that of the _Method of Limits_.

_Method of Limits.
from this point of view, consists in introducing as auxiliaries, in the
to facilitate the establishment of equations, the _limits of the ratios_
the _final ratios_ of these increments; limits or final ratios which can
 A special
employed to pass from the equations between these limits to the

The power which is given by such an analysis, of expressing with more
that since the calculus applies, not to the increments themselves of the
increments, we can always substitute for each increment any other
ratio of equality, or, in other words, that the limit of their ratio is
 It is clear, indeed, that the calculus of limits would be in no
 Starting from this principle, we find
Leibnitz, which are then merely conceived under another point of view.
Thus curves will be regarded as the _limits_ of a series of rectilinear
motions of constantly diminishing durations, and so on.

EXAMPLES.
 _Tangents.
the direction of the tangent to a curve; we will regard it as the limit
point so that its second point of intersection should indefinitely
 Representing the differences of the co-ordinates of
trigonometrical tangent of the angle which the secant makes with the


itself, this general formula of transcendental analysis,
  _t_ = _L_(Δ_y_/Δ_x_),
the characteristic _L_ being employed to designate the limit.
calculus of indirect functions will show how to deduce from this formula
relation between _t_ and _x_, by eliminating the auxiliary quantities
 If we suppose, in order to complete the
shall evidently have
  Δ_y_ = 2_ax_Δ_x_ + _a_(Δ_x_)²,
from which we shall obtain
  Δ_y_/Δ_x_ = 2_ax_ + _a_Δ_x_.

in proportion as Δ_x_ diminishes, is 2_ax_.
this method, _t_ = 2_ax_, as we obtained it for the same case by the

2.
_ In like manner, when the rectification of a curve
of this increment, which evidently has such a connexion with it that the
respects the same plan as with the method of Leibnitz) this general

  or (_LΔs_/Δ_x_)² = 1 + (_LΔy_/Δ_x_)² + (_LΔz_/Δ_x_)²,
according as the curve is plane or of double curvature.
necessary, for each particular curve, to pass from this equation to that
calculus properly so called.

the other general questions, the solution of which has been already

Such is, in substance, the conception which Newton formed for the
D'Alembert have presented as the most rational basis of that analysis,


_ Another distinct form under which Newton has
particularly to fix our attention, as much by its ingenious clearness in
manner of viewing the transcendental analysis, and, moreover, as having
commonly adopted by the English geometers.
_fluxions_ and of _fluents_, founded on the general idea of

To facilitate the conception of the fundamental idea, let us consider
according to any law whatever.
can present, the abscissa, the ordinate, the arc, the area, &c.
regarded as simultaneously produced by successive degrees during this
 The _velocity_ with which each shall have been described will be
_fluent_.
to this conception, in forming directly the equations between the
special calculus, the equations between the fluents themselves.
has been stated respecting curves may, moreover, evidently be applied to
produced by motion.

method with that of limits complicated with the foreign idea of motion.
In fact, resuming the case of the curve, if we suppose, as we evidently
certain direction, that of the abscissa, for example, then the fluxion
the other quantities generated, the motion cannot be conceived to be
 Now the velocity being in
to the time employed in traversing it, and this time being here
fluxions of the ordinate, of the arc, of the area, &c.
nothing else (rejecting the intermediate consideration of time) than the
increment of the abscissa.
in reality, only a manner of representing, by a comparison borrowed from
reduced to a calculus.
advantages in the various principal applications of the transcendental
this.


METHOD OF LAGRANGE.

_Derived Functions.
simplicity, consists in representing the transcendental analysis as a
establishment of equations, we introduce, in the place of the primitive
is, according to the definition of Lagrange, the coefficient of the
ascending powers of the increment of its variable.
of indirect functions has for its constant object, here as well as in
_derivatives_ which have been thus employed as auxiliaries, in order to
primitive magnitudes.

_An Extension of ordinary Analysis.
then, nothing but a simple though very considerable extension of
 Geometers have long been accustomed to introduce in
which they wished to study, their different powers, or their logarithms,
, in order to simplify the equations, and even to
 This successive _derivation_ is an artifice of
much more important resources for this common object.

consideration of these derivatives _may_ facilitate the establishment
follow from this mode of derivation rather than from any other
 Such is the weak point of the great idea of Lagrange.
The precise advantages of this analysis cannot as yet be grasped in an
question, so that the verification is often exceedingly laborious.

EXAMPLE.
_ This manner of conceiving the transcendental
of the problems above examined--that of tangents.

small element of the curve, according to the notion of Leibnitz--or as
considers it, according to its simple geometrical character, analogous
other right line can pass through the point of contact between it and
 Then, to determine its direction, we must seek the general
whatever--in that of the ordinate, for example--and dispose of the
will necessarily enter into that expression, in such a way as to
 Now this distance, being
of the right line, which correspond to the same new abscissa _x_ + _h_,

,
in which _t_ designates, as above, the unknown trigonometrical tangent
and _f'_(_x_) the derived function of the ordinate _f_(_x_).
understood, it is easy to see that, by disposing of _t_ so as to make
the interval between the two lines the least possible, so that any other
necessarily depart farther from the proposed curve.
the direction of the tangent sought, the general expression _t_ =
Infinitesimal Method and the Method of Limits.
_f'_(_x_) in each particular curve, which is a mere question of
of the operations, by the other methods.

need not stop to examine some other theories proposed, such as Euler's
or less important, and, moreover, no longer used--of the preceding

I have now to establish the comparison and the appreciation of these
 Their _perfect and necessary conformity_ is





three methods as to their actual destination, independently of their
artifice, which has been characterized in the first chapter; to wit,
uniform relations to those which are the special objects of the inquiry,
expression of the mathematical laws of the phenomena, although they have
 It is this
as _the calculus of indirect functions_, in order to mark its true
the best manner of conceiving and applying it.
this analysis, whatever the method employed, is, then, to bring every
_calculus_, and thus to diminish considerably the serious difficulty
abstract.
calculus will ever be able to grasp every question of natural
,
contradiction.
preliminary labour to be performed, in which the calculus can be of no
and invariable rules; it is that which has for its special object the
of all analytical researches.
remarkably simplified by the creation of the transcendental analysis,
uniform and precise application of general and abstract methods; by
equations between the auxiliary magnitudes; from which the calculus then
before this admirable conception, it had been necessary to establish
 Whether these indirect equations are
equations of _limits_, conformably to the conception of Newton, or,
general procedure is evidently always the same.

the common effect which they produce; it exists, besides, in the very
 In fact, not only do all three consider, in the
farther, the quantities thus introduced as subsidiary are exactly
manner of viewing them.
general term of comparison any one of the three conceptions, especially
being the freest from foreign considerations.
very definition of _derived functions_, that they are nothing else than
differential of each function to that of the corresponding variable,
very nature of the infinitesimal method, to limit ourselves to taking
power of the infinitely small increment of the variable? In the same
_limit_ towards which tends the ratio between the increment of the
indefinitely diminishes, since it evidently expresses what that ratio
That which is designated by _dx_/_dy_ in the method of Leibnitz; that
which Lagrange has indicated by _f'_(_x_), is constantly one same
of Leibnitz and Newton properly consisting in making known two general
 The transcendental
same, whatever may be the conception which is adopted, and the
identical in these different methods, which in like manner must, for any





equivalent conceptions, we shall find in each advantages and
geometers from confining themselves to any one of them, considered as


_ The conception of Leibnitz presents incontestably,
more rapid manner, and with much less mental effort, to the formation
 It is to its use that we
theories of geometry and mechanics.
speculative opinions of geometers with respect to the infinitesimal
by preference, as soon as they have to treat a new question, in order
obstacle proceeding from a misplaced obstinacy in adopting a less
 Lagrange himself, after having reconstructed the
frankness which so well suited his genius) rendered a striking and
Leibnitz, by following it exclusively in the entire system of his
 Such a fact renders any comments unnecessary.

logical relations, we cannot escape admitting, with Lagrange, that it is
notion of infinitely small quantities is a _false idea_, of which it is
ourselves in that matter.
compensation of errors, as above explained, this involves the radical
of reasonings, those which are perfectly rigorous, and those in which we
 A
unsatisfactory in a logical point of view.

reduce the infinitesimal method to that of limits, the logical character
rather than to remove it; besides, such a transformation almost entirely
facility and rapidity.

infinitesimal method would no less evidently present by its nature the
creating a transcendental analysis founded on principles so different
 This division
tends to hinder the formation of truly general analytical conceptions.
To fully appreciate the consequences of this, we should have to go back
and complete harmony between these two great sections.

_That of Newton.
that by its nature it is not exposed to the fundamental logical
 The notion
precision.
equations are regarded as exact from their very origin, and the general

resources for the solution of problems as the infinitesimal method.
obligation which it imposes, of never considering the increments of
only in the limits of those ratios, retards considerably the operations
 We may even say
 Thus
applications, is far from presenting in this method the extent and the
Leibnitz.
Newton to functions of several independent variables.
especially with reference to its applications that the relative

Several Continental geometers, in adopting the method of Newton as the
disguised this inferiority by a serious inconsistency, which consists in
infinitesimal method, and which is really appropriate to it alone.
designating by _dy_/_dx_ that which logically ought, in the theory of
other analytical conceptions this displacement of signs, they intended,
in reality, they have only succeeded in causing a vicious confusion
and exact ideas of either.
this usage in itself, that, by the mere means of signs, it could be
distinct as those under consideration.

the greater inconvenience, which I have above noted in reference to the
ordinary and the transcendental analysis; for the idea of _limits_,
remarked, a foreign idea, upon which analytical theories ought not to be


_ This perfect unity of analysis, and this purely
degree in the conception of Lagrange, and are found there alone; it is,

reduced the transcendental analysis to its true peculiar character, that
which facilitate in a remarkable degree the expression of the conditions
 At the same time, this analysis is thus necessarily
higher algebra.
previously so incoherent, have from that moment admitted of being

Unhappily, this conception, which possesses such fundamental properties,
undoubtedly destined to become the final theory of transcendental
other methods proposed, presents in its present state too many
Newton, and still more with that of Leibnitz, to be as yet exclusively
 Lagrange himself has succeeded only with great difficulty in
the infinitesimal method for the solution of the general questions of
found in treating in the same manner questions which were truly new and
 It is true that Lagrange, on several occasions, has shown
capable of leading to the greatest results.
to adapt his method to the examination of the curvature of lines, which
beautiful theory of contacts which has so greatly perfected that
 But, in spite of such happy exceptions, the
essentially unsuited to applications.

sketched, is, then, as already suggested, that, in order to really
in its principles according to the three fundamental conceptions of
ourselves to carry out almost indifferently, according to these three
the solution of all important questions, whether of the pure calculus of
 This is a course which I
philosophically of this admirable creation of the human mind, as well as
success and with facility.
science, the consideration of different methods for a single class of
but it is not indispensable; here, on the contrary, it is strictly

Having determined with precision, in this chapter, the philosophical
principal fundamental conceptions of which it admits, we have next to
composition of this calculus.


CHAPTER IV.

THE DIFFERENTIAL AND INTEGRAL CALCULUS.

ITS TWO FUNDAMENTAL DIVISIONS.

The _calculus of indirect functions_, in accordance with the
divided into two parts (or, more properly, is decomposed into two
their nature), according as it is proposed to find the relations between
general spirit of this calculus) by means of the relations between the
these direct equations by means of the indirect equations originally
 Such is, in fact, constantly the double object of the

These two systems have received different names, according to the point
 The infinitesimal
the reasons which have been given, almost all geometers employ
Calculus_, established by Leibnitz, and which are, in fact, very
 Newton, in accordance with his
_Calculus of Fluents_, expressions which were commonly employed in
 Finally, following the eminently philosophical theory founded
and the other the _Calculus of Primitive Functions_.
make use of the terms of Leibnitz, as being more convenient for the
the suggestions made in the preceding chapter, to employ concurrently
of Lagrange.


THEIR RELATIONS TO EACH OTHER.

The differential calculus is evidently the logical basis of the integral
other differential expressions than those produced by the
elements of our analysis.
essentially in bringing all the other cases, as far as is possible, to

In considering the whole body of the transcendental analysis, as I have
what can be the peculiar utility of the differential calculus,
which seems as if it must be, by itself, the only one directly
 In fact, the elimination of the _infinitesimals_ or of
establishment of equations, constituting, as we have seen, the final and
to think that the calculus which teaches how to deduce from the
the primitive magnitudes themselves, ought strictly to suffice for the
the first glance, what special and constant part the solution of the
 It would be a real error,
explain its peculiar, direct, and necessary influence, the destination
then enables us to arrive at the finite equations; for the primitive
speaking, the object of any calculus, since, on the contrary, it forms

reduced to teaching the means of _differentiating_ the different
every application of the transcendental analysis really facilitates the
infinitesimal _calculus_, which is perfectly distinct from it, although
 Such a consideration would, then,
differential calculus in the general system of the transcendental

But we should nevertheless very imperfectly conceive the real peculiar
if we saw in it only a simple preliminary labour, having no other
for the integral calculus.
confused, I think that I ought here to explain in a summary manner this
of the transcendental analysis a primary, direct, and necessary part is


 _Use of the Differential Calculus as preparatory to that of the
_ In forming the differential equations of any phenomenon
differentially only those magnitudes whose relations are sought.
impose that condition would be to uselessly diminish the resources
mathematical laws of phenomena.
primitive equations, through their differentials, other magnitudes whose
consideration of which it would be frequently impossible to establish
 Thus, for example, in the general problem of the


independent variable _x_, to which it is referred, but, at the same
differentials of one or two other functions, _y_ and _z_, which are
directly the equation between _ds_ and _dx_, which would, besides, be
 It is the same for most questions.
Now in these cases it is evident that the differential equation is not
 It is previously necessary that
been employed as intermediaries, should be entirely eliminated, in order
functions which alone are sought and those of the really independent
calculus.
order to reduce the infinitesimals to the smallest number possible,
done by determining, by means of the equations between the functions
differentials, which is merely a question of differentiation.
example, in the case of rectifications, it will be first necessary to
equations of each curve proposed; after eliminating these expressions,
_ds_ and _dx_; having arrived at this point, the elimination of the

Such is, then, the general office necessarily belonging to the
exact the employment of the transcendental analysis; to produce, as far
reduce in each case the primitive differential equations so that they
variables, and those of the functions sought, by causing to disappear,
may have been taken as intermediaries at the time of the formation of


 _Employment of the Differential Calculus alone.
questions, which, although few in number, have none the less, as we
sought enter directly, and not by their differentials, into the
the different known functions employed as intermediaries, in accordance
 These cases are the most favourable of
sufficient for the complete elimination of the infinitesimals, without
 This is what occurs, for
_velocities_ in mechanics, &c.

3.
_ Finally, some other
which is no less great, present a second exceptional case, which is in
 They are those in
integration, because they contain, at their first formation, only the
independent variables, without its being necessary to introduce,
 If in these new cases
directly and not by their differentials, ordinary algebra will suffice
integral calculus.
part in the complete solution of the problem, which will depend entirely
 The general question of _quadratures_ offers
_dA = ydx_, will become immediately fit for integration as soon as we
the intermediary function _y_, which does not enter into it
 The same circumstances exist in the problem of


_ As a general result of the
classes the mathematical questions which require the use of the
susceptible of being entirely resolved by means of the differential
those which are, on the contrary, entirely dependent upon the integral
solution; lastly, in the _third_ and the most extensive, which
differential and the integral calculus have each in their turn a
former making the primitive differential equations undergo a preparation
 Such are
ideas are generally formed.


calculus, beginning with the differential.


THE DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS.

In the exposition of the transcendental analysis, it is customary to
treatment of the abstract principles of differentiation and integration)
which concern geometry.
of the actual manner in which the science has been developed, presents,
that it makes it difficult properly to conceive either analysis or
 Having to consider here the most rational co-ordination which
of indirect functions properly so called, reserving for the portion of
mathematics the general examination of its great geometrical and


_ The fundamental division
differentiation, consists in distinguishing two cases, according as the
_implicit_; from which flow two parts ordinarily designated by the names
 It
classification.
ordinary analysis was perfect; that is, if we knew how to resolve all
_implicit_ function _explicit_; and, by differentiating it in that
immediately comprised in the first, without giving rise to any new
 But the algebraical resolution of equations being, as we
cases, it is plain that the case is very different, since we have,
although it is determinate.
constitutes then, by its nature, a question truly distinct from that
 It is
and reduce the differentiation of equations to this primary case by
mentioned.

point of view equally necessary, and too important to be left unnoticed.
The relation which is obtained between the differentials is constantly
differentiation of implicit functions than in that of explicit
 We know, in fact, from the considerations presented by
the one hand, the same primitive equation may give rise to a greater or
bottom equivalent, depending upon which of the arbitrary constants is
formulas; and that, on the other hand, the unlimited system of the
equation, presents a much more profound analytical variety than that of
and which are distinguished from each other only by a constant term.
Implicit functions must therefore be regarded as being in reality still
 We shall again
it acquires a preponderant importance.

_Two Sub-cases: A single Variable or several Variables.
fundamental parts of the Differential Calculus is subdivided into two
functions of a single variable or functions of several independent
 This second case is, by its nature, quite distinct from the
only explicit functions, and still more those which are implicit.
the rest, one of these cases is deduced from the other in a general
consists in regarding the total differential of a function which is
variables which it contains, as the sum of the partial differentials
turn, if all the others were constant.
carefully to remark, in connection with this subject, a new idea which
and of several; it is the consideration of these different special
of which increases more and more in proportion as the order of the
numerous.
to functions of several variables are, by their nature, both much more
functions of a single variable.
implicit functions, in which, in the place of the simple arbitrary
differential equations for functions of a single variable, it is the
whence must result special difficulties when these equations come to be

Finally, to complete this summary sketch of the different essential
differentiation of implicit functions, whether of a single variable or
case in which it is required to differentiate at once different
that in which all these functions are _separate_.

case than in the second, if we consider that the same imperfection of
into an equivalent explicit function, in like manner renders us unable
equations.
knowing how to resolve the primitive equations, but even without being
difficulty.

_Reduction of the whole to the Differentiation of the ten elementary
_ Such, then, are the natural connection and the logical
general system of differentiation.
functions is deduced from that of explicit functions by a single
variables is reduced by another fixed principle to that of functions of
found to rest upon the differentiation of explicit functions with a
 Now it is
entire system, consists simply in the differentiation of the ten simple
combinations, and the list of which has been given in the first chapter,
deduced, in an immediate and necessary manner, from that of the simple
 It is, then, to the knowledge of these ten
just mentioned, which bring under it all the other possible cases, that
 We see, by the
perfect is the entire system of the differential calculus.
constitutes, in its logical relations, the most interesting spectacle


_ The general
important deficiency, if I did not here distinctly indicate a final
system of differentiation.
constant transformation of derived functions, as a result of determinate
referring to new variables all the general differential formulas
 This question is now resolved in the
differential calculus is composed.
importance which it must have in any of the applications of the
considered as augmenting, by permitting us to choose (in order to form
system of independent variables which may appear to be the most
 It is thus, for
much more easily by referring the lines and surfaces to _rectilinear_
these lines, etc.
in any other manner.
solution of the problem by employing the rectilinear system, but only as
to, we can pass to the final system, which sometimes could not have been


_ In the logical classification of
inclined to suggest a serious omission, since I have not subdivided each
which seems at first view very important; namely, that of the higher or
 But it is easy to understand that this
as it does not give rise to any new difficulty.
differential calculus was not rigorously complete, that is, if we did
differentiation to the second or higher order of each determinate
 But the perfect
of being able to differentiate, to any order whatever, all known
repeated differentiation of the first order.
unimportant as it is for the differential calculus, acquires, however, a
extreme imperfection of the latter.

_Analytical Applications.
consider the various applications of the differential calculus, yet an
questions which are purely analytical, which ought, indeed, to be
because of the evident homogeneity of the considerations involved.
questions may be reduced to three essential ones.

variables, or, more generally, the transformation of functions, which
differential calculus to general analysis, and which comprises, besides
discovered by Maclaurin, John Bernouilli, Lagrange, &c.

functions whatever, of one or more variables; one of the most
may now have become, and to the complete solution of which the

present themselves under an _indeterminate_ appearance for certain
the least extensive and the least important of the three.

it is also the most susceptible of receiving a new extension hereafter,
the employment of the differential calculus in the transformation of

       *       *       *       *       *
Having thus summarily, though perhaps too briefly, considered the chief
exposition of a systematic outline of the Integral Calculus, properly so





_ The fundamental division of the Integral
Calculus, in distinguishing the integration of _explicit_ differential
differential equations.
more profound in relation to integration than to differentiation.
differential calculus, in fact, this distinction rests, as we have seen,
 But, on the other
algebraically resolved, differential equations would none the less
the explicit differential formulas; for, limiting ourselves, for the
a single variable _x_, if we suppose any differential equation between
expression of the derived function being then generally found to contain
question of integration will not have at all changed its nature, and the
having brought the proposed differential equation to be of only the
little importance.
manner much less _implicit_ than before, as regards the integration,
difficulty.
case which we are considering come within the simple integration of
proposed differential equation did not contain the primitive function
_dy/dx_ in terms of _x_ only, and thus to reduce the question to the
 Still greater difficulties would evidently be
simultaneously different functions of several independent variables.

complicated than that of explicit differentials, by the elaboration of
others have been made to depend as far as it has been possible.
various analytical methods which have been proposed for integrating
the method of multipliers, &c.
these integrations to those of differential formulas, the only one
 Unfortunately,
calculus, the art of reducing to it the integration of differential


_ Each of these two fundamental
in the differential calculus, and for precisely analogous reasons),
functions with _several independent variables_.

integration than for differentiation.
reference to differential equations.
several independent variables may evidently present this characteristic
differentially defined by a simple relation between its different
separately.
branch of the integral calculus, which is commonly named the _Integral
according to the just appreciation of Lagrange, geometers ought to have
yet been determined with sufficient exactness.
difference between this case and that of equations with a single
arbitrary functions which take the place of the simple arbitrary
proper generality.

transcendental analysis is still entirely in its infancy, since, even in
partial derivatives of a single function with two independent variables,
ordinary differential equations.
variables is much farther advanced in the case (infinitely more simple

conditions of integrability, always reduce their integration to


_ A new general
or implicit differentials, with one variable or several, is drawn from
as we have above remarked, does not give rise to any special question in

Relatively to _explicit differentials_, whether of one variable or of
only to the extreme imperfection of the integral calculus.
we could always integrate every differential formula of the first order,
evidently not form a new question, since, by integrating it at first in
immediately preceding order, from which, by a suitable series of
primitive function, the final object of these operations.
knowledge which we possess on integration of even the first order causes
produces new difficulties; for, having differential formulas of any
them, either once, or several times in succession, and that we may still
labours have produced, for the differentials of a lower order,
 This circumstance must occur
small), seeing that these successive integrals are generally very

With reference to _implicit differentials_, the distinction of orders is
of which is evidently analogous in this case, and is even greater, it is
necessarily gives rise to questions of a new nature.
could integrate every equation of the first order relating to a single
of an equation of any order whatever, inasmuch as every differential

_dx/dy_, and _d_²_y_/_dx_², to determine a function _y_ of a variable
first integration, the corresponding differential relation between _x_,
to the primitive equations.
least without introducing new auxiliary functions, unless the proposed
together with its derivatives.
equations will have to be regarded as presenting cases which are more
made to depend on one another except by special methods, the
respect to which we as yet know scarcely any thing, even for functions
[10]
  [Footnote 10: The only important case of this class which has thus
  equations of any order whatever, with constant coefficients.
  this case finally depends on the algebraic resolution of equations
]
_Another equivalent distinction.
profoundly this distinction of different orders of differential
general distinction, relative to differential equations, which remains
 Differential equations with one or more independent
more complicated and more implicit, which corresponds to the
determine at the same time several functions from the differential
derivatives.
presents a new special difficulty, that of separating the different
equations, an isolated differential equation which does not contain the
 This preliminary labour, which is
before attempting any direct integration, since we cannot undertake
to determine directly several distinct functions at once.

new distinction with the preceding one respecting the order of
 We know, in fact, that the general method for
essentially in forming differential equations, separately in relation to
different proposed equations.
effected.
relation to a single function might evidently always be reduced to the
equations, containing at the same time the different anterior
 This method has,
the natural one.

general theory of differential equations; the simultaneousness of a
differentiation of a single function.
differential equations, we can isolate all the functions; and, by
the equations to the first order.
only one and the same difficulty from two different points of sight.
But, however we may conceive it, this new difficulty is none the less
between the integration of equations of the first order and that of
 I prefer to indicate the distinction under


_ From the different considerations which have been
parts of the integral calculus, we see that the integration of explicit
necessary basis of all other integrations, which we never succeed in
evidently the only one which, by its nature, is capable of being treated
 This simple fundamental integration is often designated by the
this kind, S_f_(_x_)_dx_, may, in fact, be regarded as representing the
be _y_ = _f_(_x_).
differential calculus, to the elementary case of the differentiation of
 But the integral question is,
extensive than the differential question.
necessarily reduced, as we have seen, to the differentiation of the ten

necessarily follow from that of the simple functions, each combination
calculus.
varied complication of the question of _quadratures_, upon which, in
complete knowledge.

forms which may be assumed by the derivative function, we distinguish
functions.

_ The truly analytical
whether for _exponential_, or for _logarithmic_, or for _circular_
 But a very small number of cases of these three different
simplest; and still the necessary calculations are in most cases
 A circumstance which we ought particularly to
of quadrature have no relation to any general view of integration, and
numerous, because of the very limited extent of each.

being really a method of integration, is nevertheless remarkable for its
under the name of _integration by parts_, by means of which every
easy to be obtained.
another reason, as having suggested the first idea of that
greater extension, and of which M.
and important a use in the analytical questions produced by the theory

_Integration of Algebraic Functions.
functions, it is farther advanced.
in relation to irrational functions, the integrals of which have been
them rational.
only theory of the integral calculus which has admitted of being treated
its most satisfactory part, but perhaps also the least important.
even essential to remark, in order to have a just idea of the extreme
is not entirely resolved except for what properly concerns integration
its progress most frequently quite stopped, independently of the
analysis, seeing that it makes the integration finally depend upon the

To grasp in a general manner the spirit of the different procedures
nature, they can be primitively founded only on the differentiation of
 The results of this, conversely considered,
ones which can be directly known.
consists, as has been said in the beginning of this chapter, in reducing
of elementary ones, which unhappily we are in most cases unable to

_Singular Solutions.
essential parts of the integral calculus, considered in their logical
of sequence) to consider a very important theory, which forms implicitly
equations, but which I ought here to notice separately, as being, so to
greatest interest, both by its logical perfection and by the extent of
 I refer to what are called _Singular Solutions_ of
solutions, which have been the subject of very remarkable investigations
such a beautiful and simple general theory.
occasion to remark their existence, saw in them a paradox of the
satisfying the differential equations without being comprised in the
 Lagrange has since explained this
how such solutions are always derived from the general integral by the
 He was also the first to suitably
that he devoted to it so full a development in his "Calculus of
" In a logical point of view, this theory deserves all our
since Lagrange has given invariable and very simple procedures for
susceptible of it; and, what is no less remarkable, these procedures
therefore always applicable.
happy artifice, a means of compensating, in certain circumstances, for
 Indeed, certain problems
solutions; such, for example, in geometry, are all the questions in
its osculating circle.
this property by a differential equation, it will be, in its analytical
object of the inquiry, since it alone will represent the required curve;
designating only the system of the tangents, or of the osculating
 We may hence easily understand all the importance
appreciated by most geometers.

_ Finally, to complete our review of the vast
calculus, properly so called, there remains to be mentioned one theory,
which I have had to leave outside of the system, as not being really
supply the place of the knowledge of truly analytical integrals, which
 I refer to the determination of _definite

The expression, always possible, of integrals in infinite series, may at
imperfection of the integral calculus.
series, because of their complication, and of the difficulty of
in the algebraic point of view, although sometimes very essential
 It is particularly in the
importance, as a means of calculating what are called _definite
determinate values of the corresponding variables.

analysis, to the numerical resolution of equations in ordinary analysis.
Being generally unable to obtain the veritable integral--named by
which, differentiated, has produced the proposed differential
at least, without knowing this function, the particular numerical values
variables.
having previously resolved the corresponding algebraic one, which most
 Such an analysis is, then, by its
equations to be.
arithmetical and algebraic considerations, whence result analogous
applications.
our third chapter.
always are to obtain the true integrals, it is of the highest importance
insufficient as it is.
present day for all cases, the determination of the value of definite
nothing to desire, in a great number of cases, but less complication in
the special transformations of analysts.
_transcendental arithmetic_ as perfect, the difficulty in the
depend, finally, on a simple determination of definite integrals, which
employed in effecting such a transformation.

_Prospects of the Integral Calculus.
in this chapter, we see that, while the differential calculus
essential remains to be added, the integral calculus, or the simple
the activity of the human mind, independently of the indefinite
susceptible.
second chapter, to make apparent the impossibility of ever discovering
has undoubtedly infinitely more force with regard to the search for a
 "It
cannot hope for.
will be convinced that such a research is utterly chimerical, as being
geometers must certainly augment hereafter the amount of our knowledge

especially too little time since it has been conceived in a truly
will hereafter become.
us not forget to consider, before all, the limits which are imposed by
precise determination, have none the less an incontestable reality.

important applications of our present transcendental analysis, instead
perfection, they will rather create new resources by changing the mode
facilitate the establishment of equations, and the formation of which
which has been chosen, according to the conception suggested in the
 The resources of this nature appear to me susceptible of
pushing farther our present calculus of indirect functions.
suggestion which I submit to the geometers who have turned their

Finally, although, in the summary exposition which was the object of
imperfection which still belongs to the integral calculus, the student
analysis if he gave that consideration too great an importance.
with it, indeed, as with ordinary analysis, in which a very small amount
employed with an immense degree of utility.
really are as yet in the science of integrations, they have nevertheless
multitude of questions of the first importance in geometry, in
 The philosophical explanation of this
importance and grasp of _abstract_ branches of knowledge, the least of
researches, man having no other resource for the successive extension of
abstract, and still positive.


character of the transcendental analysis, there remains to be considered
analysis still better adapted to facilitate the establishment of
equations still more _indirect_ than the ordinary differential
 It is the _Calculus_, or, rather, the _Method of Variations_;




THE CALCULUS OF VARIATIONS.

In order to grasp with more ease the philosophical character of the
summary manner the special nature of the problems, the general
hyper-transcendental analysis.
applications have been too few, to allow us to obtain a sufficiently
fundamental theory.


PROBLEMS GIVING RISE TO IT.

The mathematical questions which have given birth to the _Calculus of
_minima_ of certain indeterminate integral formulas, which express the
considered independently of any particular subject.
time designated all the questions of this character by the common name
only the smallest number of them.

_Ordinary Questions of Maxima and Minima.
_maxima_ and _minima_, it is proposed to discover, with reference to a
assigned to these variables, in order that the corresponding value of
those values which immediately precede and follow it; that is, properly
increase and commences to decrease, or reciprocally.
calculus is perfectly sufficient, as we know, for the general resolution
variables, which suit either the maximum or minimum, must always reduce
separately with reference to each independent variable, and by
maximum from the minimum; consisting, in the case of a function of a
order taking a negative value for the maximum, and a positive value for
 Such are the well-known fundamental conditions belonging to


_ The construction of this general theory
kind had for geometers, they almost immediately rose to the
and of much greater difficulty--those of _isoperimeters_.
no longer _the values of the variables_ belonging to the maximum or the
 It is _the
the condition of the maximum or of the minimum of a certain definite


_ The oldest question of this nature is that
of the Principia, in which he determines what ought to be the meridian
by that body in the direction of its axis may be the least possible.
the course pursued by Newton, from the nature of his special method of
sufficiently general, and especially sufficiently analytical, to attract
 To effect this, the application
John Bernouilli, in proposing the celebrated problem of the

This problem, which afterwards suggested such a long series of analogous
follow in order to descend from one point to another in the shortest
 Limiting the conditions to the simple fall in a vacuum,
required curve must be a reversed cycloid with a horizontal base, and
 But the question may become
the medium, or the change in the intensity of gravity.

_Isoperimeters.
place furnished by mechanics, it is in geometry that the principal
 Thus it was
traced between two given points, is that whose area is a maximum or
was required that the maximum or minimum should belong to the surface
the corresponding volume; in other cases, it was the vertical height of
volume which it might generate, which was to become a maximum or
 Finally, these problems were varied and complicated almost
before Lagrange reduced their solution to an abstract and entirely
of geometers for such an order of inquiries.
tracing the history of this subject.
simplest principal questions, in order to render apparent the original


_ We see that all these problems,
determining what form a certain unknown function of one or more
dependent upon that function, shall have, within assigned limits, a
would take if the required function had any other form whatever.

known that if _y_ = _f(z)_, _x_ = π(_z_), are the rectilinear equations
horizontal, and the axis of _z_ to be vertical, the time of the fall of
that whose ordinate is _z₂_, is expressed in general terms by the

_
It is, then, necessary to find what the two unknown functions _f_ and π

In the same way, to demand what is the curve among all plane
thing as to propose to find, among all the functions _f(x)_ which can


limits, a maximum.
class.

_Methods of the older Geometers.
before Lagrange gave of these problems, they proposed, in substance, to
 But the means
artifices peculiar to each case, and the discovery of which did not
constantly reproduced analogous difficulties, without the solutions
their discipline and training of the mind.
mathematics presented, then, the necessary imperfection which always
yet been distinctly grasped in order to be treated in an abstract and





isoperimeters to depend upon a common analysis, organized into a
which he has applied the characteristic δ, reserving the characteristic
 These differentials of a new species,
infinitely small increments which the integrals receive, not by virtue
in the ordinary transcendental analysis, but by supposing that the
infinitely small change.
reference to curves, in which we see the ordinate, or any other variable
different, according as we pass from one point to another infinitely
infinitely near curve produced by a certain determinate modification of
[11] It is moreover clear, that the relative
laws whatever are calculated, all but the characteristic, almost exactly
 Finally, from the general
principles of the algorithm proper to this method, consisting simply in
characteristics specially appropriated to variations, before or after

  [Footnote 11: Leibnitz had already considered the comparison of one
  "_Differentiatio de curva in curvam_.
  analogy with the conception of Lagrange, the curves of Leibnitz
  deduced by the simple change of an arbitrary constant.

reduce with ease, and in the most general manner, all the problems of

previously consider an essential distinction which arises in the


_ These investigations must, in fact, be
demanded are _absolute_ or _relative_, to employ the abridged


_ The _first case_ is that in which the
sought, are not subjected, by the nature of the problem, to any
_brachystochrone_, in which the choice is to be made between all
 The _second_ case takes place when, on the contrary,
which usually consist in other definite integrals (which depend, in like
value; as, for example, in all the geometrical questions relating to
problem, the integral relating to the length of the curve, or to the
integral which is the object of the proposed investigation.

questions of the former class; for it evidently follows, from the
reduce to zero the _variation_ of the proposed integral with reference
the maximum and the minimum: and, as a characteristic for distinguishing
same integral must be negative for the maximum and positive for the
 Thus, for example, in the problem of the brachystochrone, we
equation of condition
  δ∫_{_z₂_}^{_z₁_}√([1 + (_f'(z)_)² + (π'(_z_))²]/(2_gz_))_dz_ = 0,
which, being decomposed into two, with respect to the two unknown
completely express the analytical definition of the required curve.
only difficulty peculiar to this new analysis consists in the
variations furnishes invariable and complete rules, founded, in general,
derived immense advantage.
elaboration (which this is not the place for treating in detail) is to
thereby the question comes under the ordinary transcendental analysis,
algebra if the integration can be effected.
method of variations is to effect this transformation, for which
certain of success.

_Equations of Limits.
method of variations, compared with the previous isolated solutions of
Lagrange calls _Equations of Limits_, which were entirely neglected
solutions remained necessarily incomplete.
proposed integrals are to be fixed, their variations being zero, there
 But it is no longer so when these
certain conditions; as, for example, if the two points between which the
upon given lines or surfaces.
the variation of their co-ordinates, and to establish between them the
surfaces.

_A more general consideration.
final complement of a more general and more important consideration
 If these
together all the imaginable curves susceptible of being traced between
consequently, the terms relating to each of these variations will have
the maximum or the minimum.
variables to be subjected to any fixed conditions, it will be necessary
that the number of the equations into which this general equation is
which remain truly independent.
seeking for the shortest path between any two points, in choosing it
the shortest among all those which may be taken on any given surface; a
beautiful applications of the method of variations.

_ Problems in which such modifying
second general class of applications of the method of variations,
maxima and minima.
the two cases, that in this last the modification is expressed by an
is designated by a finite equation which is immediately given.
hence apparent that the investigation of _relative_ maxima and minima is
maxima and minima.
by the genius of the great Euler before the invention of the Calculus of
these two classes of questions dependent on the other.
this, that if we add to the integral which is to be a maximum or a
nature of the problem, is to remain constant, it will be sufficient to
maximum or minimum of this whole expression.
indeed, that the part of the complete variation which would proceed from
character of this last) as well as the portion due to the first

effects exactly alike.

is applied to all the different questions which compose what is called
 It will undoubtedly have been remarked in
of the second fundamental property of the transcendental analysis
infinitesimal expressions for the representation of the same geometrical
 Upon
due to the method of variations.
the length or the area of any curve whatever; if another fixed formula
whatever line it may descend, &c.
resolve questions which unavoidably require, by their nature, the
each phenomenon by the different subjects which exhibit it.

_Other Applications of this Method.
importance of the theory of isoperimeters, and though the method of
solution of this order of problems, we should still have but an
to this.
differentiation is evidently applicable not only to the cases for which
whatever, two different manners of making the same magnitudes vary.
is in this way that Lagrange himself has made, in his "_Méchanique
variations, by employing it to distinguish the two sorts of changes
the different points which are considered, according as we compare the
same point of each body in two consecutive instants, or as we pass from
 One of these
_variations_, which, there as every where, are only differentials taken
 Such is the general acceptation in which we
appreciate the importance of this admirable logical instrument, the

The method of variations being only an immense extension of the general
susceptible of being considered under the different fundamental points
admits of.
with the infinitesimal conception, and, indeed, long before he undertook
 When he had
be applied to the Calculus of Variations, which he expounded with all

comprehension, because of the higher degree of abstraction of the ideas
the exertions of the mind, by adopting the most direct and rapid
 Accordingly, Lagrange
made of the Calculus of Variations in his "Analytical Mechanics.
fact, there does not exist the least hesitation in this respect among





Calculus of Variations, I think that I should, in conclusion, briefly
approach it to the ordinary transcendental analysis in a higher degree
[12]
  [Footnote 12: I propose hereafter to develop this new
  intended to present this hyper-transcendental analysis in a new
]
We noticed in the preceding chapter the formation of the _calculus of
the transcendental analysis a new elementary idea; the notion of two
function of two variables may receive by virtue of the change of each
 It is thus that the vertical ordinate of a surface,
which are quite distinct, and which may follow the most different laws,
horizontal co-ordinates.
nearly allied, by its nature, to that which serves as the general basis
 This last, indeed, has in reality done
peculiar conception which had been already adopted for the functions of
 I
conceptions, we may consider the calculus created by D'Alembert as
ordinary infinitesimal calculus and the calculus of variations; such a
clear and simple.

method of variations presents itself as the highest degree of perfection
 In its
general means of facilitating the mathematical study of natural
consideration of auxiliary magnitudes, chosen in such a manner that
those of the direct magnitudes.
equations was not supposed to admit of any general and abstract rules.
Now the Analysis of Variations, considered in the most philosophical
to bring within the reach of the calculus the actual establishment of
difficult questions, such is the general effect of the _varied_
equations with respect to the special objects of the investigation, are
and complete analytical methods, the object of which is to eliminate the
those ordinary differential equations which it would often have been
 The method of variations forms, then,
which, setting out from the most simple elements of algebra, organizes,
powerful, for the study of natural philosophy, and which, in its whole,
power of the human intellect.

considered in the method of variations being, by their nature, more
the employment of such a method exacts necessarily and continuously the
sight of the precise object of the investigation, in following
which signs are of scarcely any assistance.
attribute in a great degree to this difficulty the little real use which
admirable conception.


CHAPTER VI.



chapters constitute, in reality, all the essential bases of a complete
of view.
general conception relating to this analysis, I think that I should here
which is very extended, and which, though at bottom it really belongs to
nature.
the special subject of this chapter.

_Its general Character.
celebrated work entitled _Methodus Incrementorum_, consists essentially
a consequence of analogous increments on the part of the corresponding
 These increments or _differences_, which take the
infinitely small increments, may be in their turn regarded as new
so on; from which results the notion of differences of various
orders of differentials.
calculus of indirect functions, two general classes of questions:
1°.
analytical functions of one or more variables, as the result of a
generally supposed to augment in arithmetical progression.

 Reciprocally, to start from these differences, or, more generally,
primitive functions themselves, or to their corresponding relations.

to which are usually given the names of the _Direct_, and the _Inverse
the _Integral Calculus of Finite Differences_.
also, evidently admit of a logical distribution similar to that given in


_ There is no doubt that Taylor thought that by such a
absolutely distinct from ordinary analysis, and more general than the
 It
of Taylor; but Lagrange, with his usual profundity, clearly perceived
notations employed by Taylor than to the substance of his theory.
fact, that which constitutes the peculiar character of the analysis of
circumstance that the derived functions are in general of an entirely
rise to more simple and more easily formed relations: whence result the
have been already explained.
considered by Taylor; for these differences are, by their nature,
circumstance which renders them unsuitable to facilitate the
relations.
equation directly relating to the very magnitudes whose successive
 The scaffolding of new signs, which produce an
however, in a very imperfect manner, since it could always be easily
combinations of the primitive magnitudes, of which they are really only
 Thus the calculus of Taylor never has
mechanics, that powerful general aid which we have seen to result
 Lagrange has, moreover, very
of differences and the infinitesimal calculus was radically vicious, in
furnish, as particular cases, those which belong to the latter, the

From these considerations I am led to think that the calculus of finite
analysis proper, that is, with the calculus of indirect functions.
consider it, on the contrary, in accordance with the views of Lagrange,
analysis, that is to say, of that which I have named the calculus of
spite of the notation, simple _direct_ equations.


GENERAL THEORY OF SERIES.

To sum up as briefly as possible the preceding explanation, the calculus
the general theory of _Series_, the most simple cases of which had alone
 I ought, properly, to
of Algebra proper, of which it is such an extensive branch.
order to avoid a double reference to it, I have preferred to notice it
reduced to its most simple general expression, is nothing but a complete

Every _Series_, or succession of numbers deduced from one another
fundamental questions:
1°.
for its general term, so as to be able to calculate immediately any term
terms.

 In the same circumstances, to determine the _sum_ of any number of
without the necessity of continually adding these terms together.

be proposed, reciprocally, to find the law of a series from the form of
 Each of these different
conceived a greater number of different _laws_ for the series, according
and according to the function which expresses that dependence.
even consider series with several variable indices, as Laplace has done
has given the name of _Theory of Generating Functions_, although it is
differences or of the general theory of series.

of the truly infinite extent and variety of the questions to which
simple in appearance and so limited in its origin.
presents as many different cases as the algebraic resolution of
much more complicated, so much, indeed, that it always needs this last
 We may, therefore, anticipate what
labours of several geometers of the first order.
possess as yet the complete and logical solution of any but the most


_ It is now easy to conceive the
between the calculus of finite differences and the theory of series
 In fact, every differentiation after the
a series with one or with several variable indices, from the expression
regarded as having for its object the summation of a series, the general
 In this
direct or inverse, resolved by Taylor and his successors, have really a

Taylor really give any essential facility in the solution of questions
 It would be, perhaps, more advantageous for most cases,
themselves, certain combinations of which they represent.
calculus of Taylor does not rest on a truly distinct fundamental idea,
never really be any important advantage in considering it as detached
branch.
even if it does not cause complication, seems to me to retain the
familiar to geometers, they were naturally led to prefer the special





calculus of finite differences without noticing a new conception to
importance.
functions which preserve the same value for an infinite series of values
must be necessarily added to the integrals of the equations of finite
arbitrary constants are added to all quadratures in order to complete
 This idea, primitively introduced by Euler, has since
 Fourier, who has made





_ Among the principal general applications which have been made
the first rank, as the most extended and the most important, the
general theory of series ought not to be considered as constituting, by


_ This great class of problems being then set aside, the
is, undoubtedly, thus far, the general method of _interpolations_, so
empirical laws of natural phenomena.
known, in intercalating between certain given numbers other intermediate
first.
calculus of Taylor, how truly foreign and often inconvenient is the
depend on that analysis.
interpolation, deduced from the ordinary algorithm of the calculus of
almost always preferred, and which have been found directly, without
the question.

_Approximate Rectification, &c.
of the calculus of finite differences, which deserves to be
employment made of it in geometry for determining by approximation the
body of any form whatever.
conceived abstractly as depending on the same analytical investigation
supplement to the entirely logical geometrical methods which often lead
calculations of very complicated execution.


to the calculus of finite differences.
proposed philosophical outline of ABSTRACT MATHEMATICS.

CONCRETE MATHEMATICS will now be the subject of a similar labour.
we shall particularly devote ourselves to examining how it has been
by invariable procedures, to reduce to pure questions of analysis all
thus to impress on these two fundamental bases of natural philosophy a
high perfection, which could be communicated to them by such a course




GEOMETRY.


BOOK II.





GENERAL VIEW OF GEOMETRY.

_Its true Nature.
character of concrete mathematics, compared with that of abstract
shown in a special manner that geometry must be considered as a true
than any other.
essentially by the application of mathematical analysis, which it so
of this fundamental science, which most minds at present conceive to be
 It is
character of geometrical reasonings, even in the present state of
are much more closely united than those relating to any other science,
geometers, a certain number of primitive phenomena, which, since they
alone, and which form the necessary basis of all the deductions.

it considers being necessarily the most universal and the most simple of
 Not only may all the bodies of nature give rise to geometrical
phenomena would still exist, even though all the parts of the universe
 Geometry is then, by its nature, more
 At the same time, its phenomena are more simple,
latter are always complicated with the former.
good in comparing geometry with abstract thermology.

part of concrete mathematics; that part the study of which, in addition
rest.

orders of inquiries which constitute our present geometry, we should
science, viewed in all its bearings.


_ Geometry is commonly defined in a very vague and entirely
 An improvement on
of extension; but such an explanation would be very insufficient,
true general character of geometrical science.

which, very simple in themselves, have been singularly obscured by the


_ The first is that of _Space_.
properly consists simply in this, that, instead of considering extension
regard as containing all the bodies of the universe.
naturally suggested to us by observation, when we think of the
placed.
relations, such an _impression_ may be substituted for the body itself,
 As to the physical nature
ourselves, as being entirely analogous to the actual medium in which we
geometrical _space_ would undoubtedly be conceived as liquid also.
circumstance is, moreover, only very secondary, the essential object of
the bodies which manifest it to us.
the importance of this fundamental image, since it permits us to study
other phenomena which constantly accompany them in real bodies, without,
 The regular establishment of
been made in the rational study of geometry, which would have been
and the magnitude of bodies, all their other physical properties.
use of such an hypothesis, which is perhaps the most ancient
familiar to us, that we have difficulty in exactly estimating its
from its suppression.

_Different Kinds of Extension.
conception which we have to examine is that of the different kinds of
_point_, and of which the ordinary explanation is so unsatisfactory.

  _solid_, commonly used by geometers to designate a _volume_.
  certain, in fact, that when we wish to consider separately a
  mentally solidify its exterior envelope, so that a _line_ and a
  _volume_.
  that bodies may penetrate one another with more facility, we are
  which renders still more sensible the impropriety of the word
]
Although it is evidently impossible to conceive any extension absolutely
incontestable that, in a great number of occasions, even of immediate
separately from the third, or on a single dimension, considered
 Again, independently of this direct
with two, clearly presents itself as an indispensable preliminary for
immediate theory of which would be too complicated.
general motives which oblige geometers to consider separately extension
three together.

human mind, in order that it may be able to think, in a permanent
 The hyperbolical
tend to convey false ideas of them; but, examined in themselves, they
respecting these two kinds of extension, making complete abstraction of
 Now for this it is
becoming gradually smaller and smaller, the two others remaining the
fix the attention.
a _surface_, and, by a second analogous operation, the idea of a _line_,

a _point_, or of an extension considered only with reference to its
consequently to determine positions.

circumscribing volumes; and in the same way, _lines_, in their turn,
 But this
secondary one.

dimensions; it would be, in fact, impossible to represent to one's self
otherwise than as an infinitely fine thread.
degree of tenuity attributed by each individual to the dimensions of
must depend on the degree of subtilty of his habitual geometrical
 This want of uniformity has, besides, no real
surface and of line should satisfy the essential condition of their
are to be neglected as being smaller than all those whose magnitude his

We hence see how devoid of all meaning are the fantastic discussions of
 It should also be
geometers in an unphilosophical manner, since, for example, they explain
inverse of their natural dependence, which often produces the most





general definition of geometry, continuing to conceive this science as

It is necessary in this matter to go into a thorough explanation,
notion of _measurement_ is not exactly the same with reference to


_ If we take the word _measurement_
simply the determination of the value of the _ratios_ between any
_measurement_ of surfaces and of volumes, unlike that of lines, is never
being effected directly.
direct; that of two surfaces or of two volumes is, on the contrary,
 Thus we conceive that two lines may be superposed; but
evidently impossible in most cases; and, even when it becomes rigorously
 It
geometrical measurement of a surface or of a volume.

_Measurement of Surfaces and of Volumes.
that, whatever may be the form of a body, there always exists a certain
is sufficient to define exactly the magnitude of its surface or of its
 Geometry, regarding these lines as alone susceptible of being
them, the ratio of the surface or of the volume sought, to the unity of
 Thus the general object of
all comparisons of surfaces or of volumes to simple comparisons of

Besides the very great facility which such a transformation evidently
from it, in considering it in a more extended and more scientific
questions relating to volumes and to surfaces, considered with reference
 Such is often the most important use of the
functions of the corresponding lines.

are sometimes employed; but such measurements are not regarded as
rarely applicable, to the insufficiency or to the difficulty of truly
 It is thus that we often determine the volume of a
 In the
volume an equivalent liquid volume, we establish directly the comparison
masses, of assuming any desired form.
purely mechanical, and rational geometry necessarily rejects them.

determination and true geometrical measurements, I will cite a single
ratio of the ordinary cycloid to that of the generating circle.
geometry of his time was as yet insufficient for the rational solution
 Galileo conceived the idea of discovering that ratio
 Having weighed as exactly as possible two plates
of a circle and the other that of the generated cycloid, he found the
inferred that the area of the cycloid is triple that of the generating
obtained by Pascal and Wallis.
extreme simplicity of the ratio sought; and we can understand the
practicable.

relating to _volumes_ and that relating to _surfaces_.
of the geometry of _lines_ is not so apparent, since, in order to
being made directly.
explanation with respect to them.

_Measurement of curved Lines.
distinguish between the right line and curved lines, the measurement of
always indirect.
practicable for curved lines, it is nevertheless evident that truly
precision, even when it is possible.
for its general object, to reduce in every case the measurement of
extended point of view, to reduce to simple questions of right lines all
 To
that in every curve there always exist certain right lines, the length
 Thus, in a
to deduce that of the circumference; in the same way, the length of an
the diameter of the generating circle, &c.
considering the whole of each curve, we demand, more generally, the
rectilinear parameters, which determine the whole curve, the chord of
 To discover
of similar right lines, is the general problem of the part of geometry

Combining this consideration with those previously suggested with
science of geometry, conceived in all its parts, by assigning to it, for
of extent, volumes, surfaces, or lines, to simple comparisons of right
and which indeed could not be reduced to any others more easy to effect.
Such a conception, at the same time, indicates clearly the veritable
utility and its perfection.

_Measurement of right Lines.
explanation, I have yet to show how there can be, in geometry, a special
with the principle that the measurement of this class of lines must

It is so, in fact, as compared with that of curved lines, and of all the
 But it is evident that the
the linear unit can be applied to it.
insurmountable difficulties, as I had occasion to show, for another
 We must, then, make the measurement
capable of being effected directly.
primary distinct branch of geometry, exclusively devoted to the right
means of the relations belonging to the figures resulting from their
 This preliminary part of geometry, which is almost
susceptible of a great development.
importance, since all other geometrical measurements are referred to
of every question would remain unfinished.

arranged according to their natural dependence; the geometry of _lines_
of _surfaces_, and, finally, that of _solids_.


INFINITE EXTENT OF ITS FIELD.

Having determined with precision the general and final object of
to the field embraced by each of its three fundamental sections.

extension which is rigorously infinite; for the measurement of lines, of
as we can conceive different figures subjected to exact definitions; and

Geometers limited themselves at first to consider the most simple
deduced from these primitive elements by the least complicated
 But they have perceived, since Descartes, that, in order
necessary to make it apply to all imaginable figures.
geometry will then inevitably comprehend as particular cases all the
 It is
far as possible, all figures which can be rigorously conceived.

figures present a variety which is quite infinite.

_Infinity of Lines.
generated by the motion of a point governed by a certain law, it is
conceive different laws for this motion, which may evidently be
sometimes accidentally happen that new generations produce curves which
 Thus, among plane curves, if a point moves
will generate a _circle_; if it is the sum or the difference of its
described will be an _ellipse_ or an _hyperbola_; if it is their
equally from a fixed point and from a fixed line, it will describe a
rolls along a straight line, we shall have a _cycloid_; if it advances
turns in any manner whatever, there will result what in general terms
perfectly distinct curves as we can suppose different relations between
 Each of these
constructions which geometers have imagined, and which give rise to
 Finally, there exists a still


_ As to _surfaces_, the figures are necessarily
lines.
curves, the different infinitely numerous laws to which the motion of
line itself may change its nature; a circumstance which has nothing
any distinct figure.
cause the figures of surfaces to vary, while there exists only one for
 It is useless to cite examples of this doubly infinite
 It would be sufficient to consider the extreme
right line, and which comprehends the whole family of cylindrical
developable surfaces, &c.

_Infinity of Volumes.
for any special consideration, since they are distinguished from each

In order to complete this sketch, it should be added that surfaces
every curve may be regarded as produced by the intersection of two
 It is in this way, indeed, that the first lines which we may
nature gave directly the straight line and the circle.
ellipse, the parabola, and the hyperbola, the only curves completely
resulting from the intersection of a cone with circular base by a plane
 It is evident that, by the combined employment
surfaces, we could produce a rigorously infinitely series of distinct
furnished by observation.

_Analytical invention of Curves, &c.
means for the invention of figures have scarcely any farther importance,
Descartes.
, the
that nothing is more easy than to conceive new lines and new surfaces,
 This
than all the direct resources of geometry, developed by the most
order of conceptions.
striking manner, the necessarily infinite variety of geometrical forms,
 Lastly,
still more numerous than those of lines, since lines are represented
to equations with three variables, which necessarily present a greater

The preceding considerations are sufficient to show clearly the
geometry.


EXPANSION OF ORIGINAL DEFINITION.

To complete the formation of an exact and sufficiently extended idea of
to the general definition above given, in order to present it under a
imperfectly conceived.

of lines, surfaces, and volumes, that is, as has been explained, the
lines, we have evidently the advantage of indicating a general
 But if we set
science of geometry, we will at first be induced to regard the preceding
of the investigations which constitute our present geometry do not at
 In
definition; for, in fact, if, instead of confining ourselves to
to grasp the leading questions, in comparison with which all others,
will finally recognize that the measurement of lines, of surfaces, and
often _indirect_, of all geometrical labours.

definition all its value, it is indispensable to enter into some





not seem to relate to the _measurement_ of extent, we find that they
line or of each surface; that is, in the knowledge of the different
considered.
necessary relation of such a study to the question of _measurement_, for
indispensable preliminary.
considerations, equally fundamental, although quite distinct in their


 _To find the most suitable Property.
_first_, purely scientific, consists in remarking that, if we did not
one according to which geometers had first conceived it, in most cases
to its _measurement_.
different definitions which each figure admits of are not all equally
complete oppositions in that respect.
definition of each figure was evidently not chosen with this condition
most suitable; whence results the necessity of discovering others, that
figure.
"the curve which, with the same contour, contains the greatest area.
This is certainly a very characteristic property, but we would evidently
starting point the solution of the fundamental questions relating to the
 It is clear, in
a fixed point must evidently be much better adapted to inquiries of this
 In like
of the parabola if he had known no other property of that curve than
parallel to its generatrix? The purely speculative labours of preceding
indispensable preliminaries to the direct solution of such a question.
The same is true, in a still greater degree, with respect to surfaces.
To form a just idea of this, we need only compare, as to the question of
one, no less characteristic certainly, which would consist in regarding
greatest volume.

is possible, all the properties of each line or of each surface, in
and of cubatures, which constitutes the final object of geometry.
even say that the principal difficulty of questions of this kind
to the nature of the proposed problem.
indicate, for more precision, the measurement of extension as the
the very bottom of the subject, shows clearly the necessity of including
or definitions belonging to the same form.

2.
_ A second consideration,
indispensable for organizing in a rational manner the relation of the

The science of geometry having to consider all imaginable figures which
have remarked, that questions relating to any figures presented by
supposed to have attained its perfection.
actually pass to concrete geometry, we constantly meet with a
abstract types we are to refer, with sufficient approximation, the real
 Now it is for the purpose of
know the greatest possible number of properties of each figure

In fact, if we always confined ourselves to the single primitive
_measure_ it (which, according to the first order of considerations,
necessarily barren in the application, since we should not ordinarily
there; to ensure that, it would be necessary that the single
precisely that one whose verification external circumstances would
could not count, although it might sometimes take place.
only by multiplying as much as possible the characteristic properties of
it in the concrete state, and of thus turning to account all our
susceptible of being directly proven.
the only one in given circumstances, and varies, on the other hand, for
previous determination.

_Illustration: Orbits of the Planets.
furnishes us with a very memorable example in this matter, well suited
 We know that the ellipse
about the sun, and the satellites about their planets.
fundamental discovery, which re-created astronomy, ever have been
ellipse only as the oblique section of a circular cone by a plane? No
 The
any of its points to two fixed points is a constant quantity, is
to be recognized in this case, but still is not directly suitable.
only characteristic which can here be immediately verified is that which
length of the focal distances and their direction; the only relation
which connects the distance from the planet to the sun, with the time
 It was, then, necessary
properties of the conic sections should have previously presented their
could thus pass from the abstract to the concrete, in choosing from
easily proven for the planetary orbits.

_Illustration: Figure of the Earth.
but relating to surfaces, occurs in considering the important question
 If we had never known any other property of
distant from an interior point, how would we ever have been able to
necessary previously to deduce from this definition of the sphere some
surface alone, such as the constant ratio which exists between the
sphere going towards a pole, and the angular height of this pole above
 Another example, but involving a much longer
earth is not rigorously spherical, but that its form is that of an

After such examples, it would be needless to give any others, which any
 All of them prove that, without a very
relation of the abstract to the concrete, in geometry, would be purely
essential foundations.

necessity of introducing into geometry a great number of investigations
while we continue, however, to conceive such a measurement as being the
 In this way we can retain
definition, and still include in it, in a very logical though indirect
not seem to relate to the measurement of extension, as intended either
possible the application of the solutions obtained.

connexion of the study of the properties of lines and surfaces with
evident that geometers, in the progress of their labours, must by no

the manner of conceiving each figure, they should pursue that study,
property may be for rectifications, quadratures, and cubatures.
would uselessly fetter their inquiries by attaching a puerile importance

This general exposition of the general object of geometry is so much the
of the different properties of each line and of each surface necessarily
researches.
to quadratures, and to cubatures, are evidently, by themselves, very few
 On the other hand, the study of
activity of the human mind, in which it may always hope to make new
 Thus, although geometers have occupied themselves for
any real interruption, in the study of the conic sections, they are far
certain, indeed, that in continuing to devote themselves to it, they
curves.
century past, it is not because they are completed, but only, as will be
brought about by Descartes, has singularly diminished the importance of

It results from the preceding considerations that not only is the field
be considered, but also in virtue of the diversity of the points of view
 This last conception is, indeed,
of geometrical researches.
essentially, for each line or for each surface, in connecting all the
phenomenon, regarded as the primitive definition.


THE TWO GENERAL METHODS OF GEOMETRY.

Having now explained in a general and yet precise manner the final
a very extensive class of researches which did not at first appear
to be followed for the formation of this science.
indispensable to complete this first sketch of the philosophical
 I shall here confine myself to indicating the
this important fundamental idea in the following chapters.

different, that there result from them two sorts of geometry, so to say,
been properly apprehended.
_Analytical Geometry_, habitually employed to designate them, give a
 I would much prefer the purely historical
Moderns_, which have at least the advantage of not causing their true
 But I propose to employ henceforth the
seem to me suited to characterize with precision the veritable nature of


_ The fundamental difference between the
which the geometers of antiquity treated geometrical questions, is not
case.
not entirely unknown to the ancient geometers, since they used to make
which was for them, as a means of deduction, a sort of real, though very
algebra.
manner than they have used it, in order to obtain certain geometrical
ancient geometry; this occurs very frequently with respect to those
designated under the name of _determinate_.
as is the influence of the calculus in our modern geometry, various
character which distinguishes it from the ancient geometry, although
 I will cite, as an example, the
modern, and which, however, leads in certain cases to complete
 It is not, then, the
between the two courses which the human mind can take in geometry.

to me to consist in the very nature of the questions considered.
truth, geometry, viewed as a whole, and supposed to have attained entire
imaginable figures, and, on the other, discover all the properties of
 It admits, from this double consideration, of being treated
together all the questions, however different they may be, which relate
whatever analogy there may exist between them; or, 2°, on the contrary,
different figures they may relate, and separating the questions relating
 In a word, the
to the _bodies_ studied or to the _phenomena_ to be considered.
first plan, which is the most natural, was that of the ancients; the
Descartes.

_Geometry of the Ancients.
ancient geometry is that they studied, one by one, the different lines
figure till they thought they had exhausted all that there was
 In this way of proceeding,
bestowed on the preceding ones could not offer directly any essential
trained the mind.
proposed as to two different figures, the complete knowledge acquired
the investigation for the other.
assured; so that they could not be certain, in advance, of obtaining any
questions which had been already resolved.
determination of the tangents to the three conic sections did not
curve, such as the conchoid, the cissoid, &c.
the ancients was, according to the expression proposed above,


_ In the system of the moderns, geometry is, on
figures whatever.
geometrical expressions of any interest may be proposed with reference
 This is seen directly in the fundamental
constitute, as has been shown, the final object of geometry.
remark is no less incontestable, even for investigations which relate to
most essential, such as the question of tangents or of tangent planes,
, are evidently common to all figures
 The very few investigations which are truly peculiar to
 This
in order to treat it by itself, in an entirely general manner, every
it may be considered.
constructed to the special determination of the phenomenon which is
labour, to be executed according to invariable rules, and the success of
 This labour is, in a word, of the same
 There
solution which is necessarily furnished by the general method, with all
admit of.
conception and the complete solution of a new question belonging to any
 Labours of this kind are alone regarded as producing
 The attention of geometers, thus relieved
wholly directed towards general questions, has been thereby able to
which, applied to the curves studied by the ancients, have led to the
suspected.
Descartes in the general system of the science.

_The Superiority of the modern Geometry.
fundamental character of each of the two geometries is undoubtedly
geometry.
Descartes, rational geometry was not truly constituted upon definitive
 In fact, as
continuing indefinitely to follow the course of the ancients, as did the
adding some new curves to the small number of those which they had
still be found, after a long series of ages, to be very inconsiderable
variety of the forms which would still have remained to be studied.
the contrary, at each question resolved according to the method of the
for all, diminished by so much with respect to all possible bodies.
Another consideration is, that it resulted, from their complete want of
investigations, were entirely abandoned to their own strength, without
whatever.
to call forth all their admirable sagacity, it necessarily rendered
considerable time which they employed in the study of the conic
 Modern geometry, making the progress of our mind certain,
forces of our intelligence, which the ancients were often obliged to

A no less important difference between the two systems appears when we
 Indeed, we have
geometry can be founded upon rational bases only so far as the
 In
necessarily very small, of those which we shall have considered, the
never have any other than an essentially accidental character, since
under the abstract types considered by geometers.

relation established between the speculations of the Greek geometers
orbits.
was no good reason for hoping for similar coincidences; and it would
geometers should have been directed to abstract figures entirely
perhaps of an important and immediate application.
least, that nothing positively guaranteed the necessary applicability of
 It is quite another thing in the modern
 From the single circumstance that in it we proceed by general
evident certainty that the figures really existing in the external world
phenomenon which it considers presents itself in them.

geometry wears essentially the character of the infancy of the science,
philosophical resolution produced by Descartes.
the other hand, that geometry could not be at first conceived except in
 _General_ geometry would not have been possible,
special labours on the most simple figures had not previously furnished
impossibility of persisting indefinitely in the primitive geometrical


_ From this last consideration we
must be now regarded as the only true dogmatical geometry, and that to
much more than an historical interest, nevertheless it is not possible
the science.
geometry all the results which it has furnished; but, from the very
with the ancient method, which will always serve as the preliminary
 The reason
 In fact, _general_ geometry being
the calculus in the transformation of geometrical into analytical
the subject immediately at its origin.
mathematical analysis, from its nature, can never commence any science
already been sufficiently cultivated to establish, with respect to the
points for the analytical operations.
once discovered, analysis will enable us to deduce from them a multitude
suspect; it will perfect the science to an immense degree, both with
co-ordination established between them.
could never be sufficient to form the bases of any natural science, not

the point of the discovery of precise relations.

nature, a primary part, absolutely necessary and more or less extensive,
 It forms a rigorously
 But it is to this that
 I will consider,
_preliminary_ geometry restricted to exactly its necessary limits, in
examination of _general_ or _definitive_ geometry, the only one which is




ANCIENT OR SYNTHETIC GEOMETRY.

The geometrical method of the ancients necessarily constituting a
furnish _general_ geometry with indispensable foundations, it is now
preliminary function of _special_ geometry, thus reduced to the





_ In considering it under this point of
the right line alone for what concerns the geometry of _lines_; to the
of bodies terminated by plane faces.
relating to these three fundamental questions form, in fact, the
be obtained except by a direct study of the subject; while, on the
circle, and of the surfaces and volumes which are connected with it, may
or _analytical_ geometry; these primitive elements at once furnishing
calculus to geometrical questions, which would not have been possible

It results from this consideration that, in common practice, we give to
it; since, besides the right line, polygons, and polyhedrons, we also
might, however, be as purely analytical as that, for example, of the
 An unreflecting veneration for antiquity contributes to
for it is the serious inconvenience for ordinary instruction which there
education, the solution of several essential questions, which are
important uses.
should employ the integral calculus in obtaining the interesting results
of the sphere, &c.
extremely simple considerations.
importance with regard to the persons destined to study the whole of
logical order would have a much greater comparative value.
contrary case being the more frequent, theories so essential have
 Perhaps the conic
, might be advantageously added in such cases.

_Not to be farther restricted.
geometry, which cannot be founded on the application of the calculus,
researches, relating to the right line, polygonal areas, and
it any more; although, by a veritable abuse of the spirit of analysis,
principal theorems of elementary geometry under an algebraical point of
 Thus some have pretended to demonstrate, by simple abstract
exists between the three angles of a rectilinear triangle, the
parallelopipedons, &c.
propositions which cannot be obtained except by a direct study of the
it.
and philosophical tendency which leads us to extend farther and farther
 In mechanics, the
of similar character.

principles previously presented.
that, since the calculus is not, and cannot be, any thing but a means of
employ it in establishing the elementary foundations of any science
operation repose? A labour of this nature, very far from really
return towards the metaphysical age, in presenting real facts as mere

When we examine in themselves these pretended analytical demonstrations
their necessary want of meaning.
manner of conceiving the principle of _homogeneity_, the true general

admit the coexistence in the same equation of numbers obtained by
to the constant practice of geometers.
that, by employing the law of homogeneity in this arbitrary and
quite as much apparent rigour, propositions whose absurdity is manifest
 In examining attentively, for example, the
analytically that the sum of the three angles of any rectilinear
founded on this preliminary principle that, if two triangles have two of
necessarily be equal to the third angle of the other.
being granted, the proposed relation is immediately deduced from it in a
 Now the analytical consideration by which
such a nature that, if it could be correct, we could rigorously deduce
sides of a triangle are sufficient, without any angle, for the entire
 We may make analogous remarks on all
verified in a perfectly apparent manner.

present day essentially analytical, the more necessary was it to guard
which all geometrical observation would be dispensed with, in
this natural science.

_Attempted Demonstrations of Axioms, &c.
geometers have too much overlooked the character of a natural science
attempts, so long made, to _demonstrate_ rigorously, not by the aid of
propositions of elementary geometry.
evidently be impossible to avoid sometimes recurring to simple and
results.
by virtue of their extreme simplicity, much more closely connected with
still be found which cannot be deduced, and which, on the contrary,
 It may be admitted that the greatest logical
possible, but it would be absurd to pretend to make them completely
 I avow, moreover, that I find fewer real inconveniences in
of these geometrical notions thus established by direct observation,
of complicated and indirect demonstrations, even when these

The true dogmatic destination of the geometry of the ancients, reduced
characterized as exactly as possible, it is proper to consider summarily
 I think that I
these parts, that which has for its object the study of _the right
the _cubature of polyhedrons_, from their limited extent, not being
importance, distinct from those indicated in the preceding chapter with





right line, properly consists in determining, by means of one another,
us always to know indirectly the length and position of a right line, in
 This fundamental problem is
distinct, the one _graphical_, the other _algebraic_.
very imperfect, is that which must be first considered, because it is
much more perfect in the most important respects, cannot be studied till
other.


GRAPHICAL SOLUTIONS.

The graphical solution consists in constructing at will the proposed
dimensions changed in any ratio whatever.
mentioned as being the most simple and the one which would first occur
incapable of application.
being most extensively and most usefully applied.
important and continual use of it at the present day, not only to
positions, but even for the actual determination of geometrical
 The ancients, in
this procedure in a much more extensive manner, since it was for a long
precise determinations.
Samos estimated the relative distance from the sun and from the moon to
as possible, so as to be similar to the right-angled triangle formed by
an observation of the angle at the earth would consequently be
 Archimedes himself, although he was
times employed similar means.
cause this method to be entirely abandoned, although it greatly
for a great number of researches, in which we now regard the use of the

This exact reproduction of any figure whatever on a different scale
the proposed figure lie in the same plane.
frequently happens, that they are situated in different planes, we see,
 The artificial
being a perfectly faithful image of the real figure, it is necessary
rise to different systems of _Projection_.

phenomena correspond in the two figures.
new series of geometrical investigations, the final object of which is
constructions.
of this kind for various cases in which we now employ spherical
celestial sphere.
other plane figures which for a long time supplied the place of the
 We see by this that the ancients really knew the elements of
it in a distinct and general manner.

philosophical character of this "Descriptive Geometry;" although, being
the proper domain of this work.


DESCRIPTIVE GEOMETRY.

All questions of geometry of three dimensions necessarily give rise,
is peculiar to them; that of substituting for the different
and which it is almost always impossible to execute, simple equivalent
results.
this kind would be evidently incomplete and really inapplicable in
preferable as being more direct.
means for always effecting such a transformation that _Descriptive
system, by the illustrious MONGE.
uniform method of representing bodies by figures traced on a single
perpendicular to each other, and one of which is supposed to turn about
this system, or in any other equivalent to it, it is sufficient to
surfaces by the projections of their generating lines.
established, Monge--analyzing with profound sagacity the various partial
incongruous procedures, and considering also, in a general and direct
they could always be reduced to a very small number of invariable
by uniform operations, relating essentially some to the contacts and
 Simple and entirely general
having been formed, all the geometrical questions which may arise in any
perspective, dialling, fortification, &c.
simple particular cases of a single theory, the invariable application
facilitated in practice by profiting by the peculiar circumstances of

       *       *       *       *       *
This important creation deserves in a remarkable degree to fix the
has yet effected as a first step, and thus far the only really complete
imprint upon all our arts a character of precision and of rationality,
 Such a revolution must, in fact,
essentially connected with that science which is the most simple, the
 It cannot fail to extend hereafter,
 Indeed
any one else, endeavoured to sketch out a corresponding system for the

Essential as the conception of descriptive geometry really is, it is
destination, as did those who, in the excitement of its first discovery,
rational geometry.
hopes.
special value except as a science of application, and as forming the
relations, it could not introduce any truly distinct order of
 We must not forget that, in order that a
descriptive geometry, it must necessarily have been previously resolved
always need to be prepared for practice in such a way as to supply the
which really constitutes the only characteristic function of descriptive

It is proper, however, to remark here, that, with regard to intellectual
philosophical peculiarity, quite independent of its high industrial
 This is the advantage which it so pre-eminently offers--in
combinations in space, and to follow with precision their continual
exercising to the utmost, in the most certain and precise manner, that
"imagination," and which consists, in its elementary and positive
and variable collection of ideal objects, as if they were really before

Finally, to complete the indication of the general nature of descriptive
while it belongs to the geometry of the ancients by the character of its
by the nature of the questions which compose it.
fact eminently remarkable for that generality which, as we saw in the
geometry; for the methods used are always conceived as applicable to any
influence.
like most of those of the ancients, and at the same time general, like

       *       *       *       *       *
After this important digression, we will pursue the philosophical
least possible development, as an indispensable introduction to
 We have now sufficiently considered the _graphical_
is, the determination of the different elements of any right-lined
manner the _algebraic_ solution.


ALGEBRAIC SOLUTIONS.

This kind of solution, the evident superiority of which need not here be
the system of the ancient geometry, although the logical method which is
it.
respect, what was established generally in the preceding chapter, that
essentially to be distinguished from the ancient.
fact the true inventors of the present trigonometry, spherical as well
account of the extreme inferiority of their algebraical knowledge.
is, then, really in this chapter, and not, as it might at first be
examination of _general_ geometry, that it is proper to consider the
improperly, included in what is called _analytical geometry_, but which

Since all right-lined figures can be decomposed into triangles, it is
a triangle by means of one another, which reduces _polygonometry_ to





consists essentially in forming, between the angles and the sides of a
evidently reduce all trigonometrical problems to mere questions of


_ In considering the establishment of these
fundamental distinction with respect to the manner of introducing the
_directly_, by themselves or by the circular arcs which are proportional
called their _trigonometrical lines_.
trigonometry the second was of necessity the only one originally
geometry made it easy enough to find exact relations between the sides
angles, while it would have been absolutely impossible at that epoch to


_ At the present day,
motive for preference no longer exists; but geometers have none the less
necessity; for, the same reason which enabled these trigonometrical
as it is still more easy to conceive _à priori_, render these equations
instead of being established between right lines and arcs of circles.
Such a consideration has so much the more importance, as the question
continually employed in all parts of mathematical science, as well as in

It may be objected, however, that when an angle is given, it is, in
and that when it is unknown, it is its angular value which is properly
 It
intermediaries between the sides and the angles, which have to be
capable of simplifying the proposed research.
explain, with more generality and precision than is customary, the great


_ It consists in the fact that
question of trigonometry into two others essentially distinct, one of
trigonometrical lines, or the converse, and the other of which proposes
their angles, or the converse.
questions is evidently susceptible, by its nature, of being entirely
possible angles, since it depends only upon those angles, and not at all
while the solution of the second question must necessarily be renewed,
is necessary to resolve.
complete work, which would be precisely the most laborious, is no longer
decomposition had not been performed, we would evidently have found
each particular case.
trigonometrical system, which in fact would really present no actual
trigonometrical line of each angle to be considered, or the converse;
convenient.

will be useful to compare it with a still more important one, designed
in its arithmetical relations--the admirable theory of _logarithms_.
examining in a philosophical manner the influence of this theory, we see
arithmetical operations into two distinct parts.
complicated of these is capable of being executed in advance once for
all upon the infinitely different combinations into which they can
a constant number.
necessity be recommenced for each new formula which is to have its
exponents correlative operations which are infinitely more simple.
confine myself here to merely indicating this resemblance, which any one

We must besides observe, as a property (secondary at the present day,
the very remarkable circumstance that the determination of angles by
solution (the only one which is directly indispensable for the special
corresponding algebraic question.
that the ancients owed the possibility of knowing trigonometry.
investigation conceived in this way was so much the more easy, inasmuch
trigonometrical lines) had been previously constructed for quite a
rectification of the circle, from which resulted the actual
subsequently invented trigonometry, he could confine himself to
clearly the connexion of ideas in that matter.

_The Increase of such Trigonometrical Lines.
philosophical sketch of trigonometry, it is proper now to observe that
or arcs of circles by straight lines, with the view of simplifying our
trigonometrical lines, instead of confining ourselves to one only (as
which will be algebraically the most convenient on each occasion.
this point of view, it is clear that the number of these lines is in
and that they determine it, whatever may be the law according to which
the equations.
themselves to the most simple constructions, have carried to four or
extended much farther.

become very complicated, we conceive with the utmost facility as many
by means of a remarkable artifice, which is not usually apprehended in a
 It consists in not directly multiplying the
introducing new ones, by considering this arc as indirectly determined
first.
with more facility, we will determine, instead of its sine, the sine of
 Such a creation of _indirect_
direct geometrical methods for obtaining new ones.
say that the number of trigonometrical lines actually employed at the
instant, so to say, the transformations of analysis may lead us to
 Special names,
refer to the complement of the primitive arc, the others not occurring
circumstance which has caused a common misconception of the true extent


_ This multiplicity of trigonometrical
trigonometry, the study of the relations which exist between these
for our analytical necessities, of this variety of auxiliary magnitudes,
 It is clear, besides, from
trigonometry, although simply preparatory, is, by its nature,
generality, while the two others are circumscribed within rigorously

It is needless to add that these three principal parts of trigonometry
have seen them necessarily derived from the general nature of the
the second, of that which was first presented--the resolution of
the last place; which rendered so much the more important the
another.

which cannot give rise to any special philosophical consideration;
uses, it can be treated at the present day only as a simple application
equations, by substituting for the spherical triangle the corresponding

This summary exposition of the philosophy of trigonometry has been here
rigorous dependence and those successive ramifications which are
geometry.


reduced to its only dogmatic destination, that of furnishing to general
attention to the true science of geometry, considered as a whole, in the
 For that purpose, it is necessary to carefully
founded.




MODERN OR ANALYTICAL GEOMETRY.

_General_ (or _Analytical_) geometry being entirely founded upon the
considerations, we must begin with examining directly and in a thorough
uniform manner the constant possibility of such a co-relation.
its own extreme importance as a means of highly perfecting geometrical
the philosophical study of this admirable conception must have so much
clearness the general method to be employed in organizing the relations
representation of natural phenomena.
whole philosophy of mathematics which better deserves to fix all our





by simple analytical relations, we must evidently, in the first place,
themselves in which these phenomena are found, that is, the lines or the
 The _subject_ being thus habitually
thenceforth possible to conceive in the same manner the various

In order to organize the representation of geometrical figures by
difficulty; that of reducing the general elements of the various
substituting in geometry pure considerations of _quantity_ for all


_ For this purpose let us observe, in
three universal categories: the _magnitude_, the _figure_, and the
 As to the first, there is

admit of being reduced to the third.
results from the mutual position of the different points of which it is
figure, and every circumstance of figure can be translated by a
 It is in this way, in fact, that the human
of geometrical figures, their conception relating directly only to
 All the elementary difficulty is then properly reduced to
 Such is the
has established the general system of analytical geometry.

entire generalization of an elementary operation, which we may regard as
say, in all minds, even the most uncultivated.
indicate the situation of an object without directly pointing it out,
be employed, consists in referring that object to others which are
by which we conceive it connected with the known objects.
constitute what Descartes, and after him all geometers, have called the
 They are necessarily two in
and three, if it may be found indifferently in any region of space.
many different constructions as can be imagined for determining the
systems of co-ordinates may be conceived; they are consequently
 But, whatever may be the
simple ideas of magnitude, so that we will consider the change in the
values of its co-ordinates.

_Determination of the Position of a Point.
the least complicated case, that of _plane geometry_, it is in this way
distances from two fixed right lines considered as known, which are
each other.
simplicity; but geometers employ occasionally an infinity of others.
Thus the position of a point on a plane may be determined, 1°, by its
fixed point, and the direction of that distance, estimated by the
constitutes the system of what are called _polar_ co-ordinates, the most
which the right lines drawn from the variable point to two fixed points
distances from that point to a fixed right line and a fixed point, &c.
In a word, there is no geometrical figure whatever from which it is not
susceptible of being employed.

is, that every system of co-ordinates is equivalent to determining a
which is subjected to certain fixed conditions of determination; a
sometimes the other, according to the system considered.
indeed, conceive any other means of constructing a point than to mark it
 Thus, in the most common system, that of
by the intersection of two right lines, each of which remains constantly
_polar_ system, the position of the point is marked by the meeting of a
compelled to turn about this centre: in other systems, the required
other two lines, &c.
co-ordinates of a point in any system whatever, is always necessarily
situated.
remark, which served as the base of their method of geometrical _loci_,
resolution of _determinate_ problems, in considering separately the
constituting the object, direct or indirect, of the proposed question.
It was the general systematization of this method which was the
analytical geometry.

of which ideas of position, and thence, implicitly, all elementary
considerations--it is easy to form a direct conception, in its entire
analytical representation of geometrical figures: it is this which forms
 I will continue to consider at
was treated by Descartes; and will afterwards examine separately, under
curvature.


PLANE CURVES.

_Expression of Lines by Equations.
expressing analytically the position of a point on a plane, it can be
that definition always admits of being replaced by a corresponding
describes this line; an equation which will be thenceforth the
which will be translated by a certain algebraic modification of its
 Thus, if we suppose that a point moves on a plane without its
its co-ordinates, to whatever system they may belong, as two variables
 But if, on the contrary, this point
compelled to conceive that its co-ordinates, in all the positions which
other, which is consequently susceptible of being expressed by a
analytical definition of the line under consideration, since it will
co-ordinates of all the points of this line.
when a point is not subjected to any condition, its situation is not
of each other; while, when the point must continue upon a defined line,

or, in other words, there must exist between them a certain _equation_,
compelled to remain.
requiring it to be situated on a certain line, we conceive reciprocally
line defined in any manner whatever, is equivalent to assigning the
entirely dependent on the other.
this dependence may be more or less difficult to discover, but it must
present means may be insufficient to make it known.
consideration that we may demonstrate, in an entirely general
fundamental conception is ordinarily established for each special
lines by equations.

_Expression of Equations by Lines.
in the inverse direction, we could show as easily the geometrical
determinate system of co-ordinates, by a certain line; of which such a
characteristic definition, the scientific destination of which will be
of the equation, which will thus be noted in the most striking and the
 This picturing of equations is one of the most
thereby reacted in the highest degree upon the general perfecting of
clearly determined object and an inexhaustible career, but, in a still
analytical meditation which could not be replaced by any other.
the purely algebraic discussion of an equation undoubtedly makes known
one by one, so that in this way no general view of them could be
numerical comparisons.
equation, being only designed to represent distinctly and with perfect
directly considered, without paying any attention to the details which
 It can thereby suggest to our mind general analytical
manner, for want of a means of clearly characterizing their object.
is evident, for example, that the simple inspection of the logarithmic
 _x_, makes us perceive much more
respect to their numbers, or of sines with respect to their arcs, than
sines.
at the present day, and that it is employed whenever it is desired to
series of precise observations of any kind whatever.

_Any Change in the Line causes a Change in the Equation.
the representation of lines by equations, which is our principal object,
line could not experience any modification, however slight it might be,
 This perfect
since, in our system of analytical geometry, the mere displacements of
magnitude or form, we should be liable to confound them with one another
ingenious method designed expressly to always distinguish them.
method is founded on this principle, that although it is impossible to
axes of the co-ordinates, we can change in any manner whatever the
then, by the aid of the very simple general formula by which this
whether two different equations are the analytical expressions of only
geometrical loci; since, in the former case, one of them will pass into
system of co-ordinates employed.
subject, that general inconveniences of this nature seem to be
position are, as we have seen, the only geometrical ideas immediately
cannot be thus reduced, except by seeing in them relations of situation,
phenomena of figure with simple phenomena of position, which alone are


_ In order to complete the
the base of analytical geometry, I think that I should here indicate a
for putting in the clearest point of view this necessary representation
 It consists in this, that not
a certain equation between the two co-ordinates of any one of its
as being already of itself an equation of that line in a suitable system

It is easy to establish this principle, first making a preliminary
 The
distinguishing the object defined from all others, by assigning to it a
 But this end may be generally
simply _characteristic_, that is, indicative of a property which,
the object; or by a definition which is really _explanatory_, that is,
modes of generation.
which, under the same contour, contains the greatest area, we have
of its having all its points equally distant from a fixed point, we have
 It is, besides, evident, as a general
a _characteristic_ definition, we ought, nevertheless, to regard it as
object would necessarily lead us to discover.

made, which represents every definition of a line as being necessarily
apply to definitions which are simply _characteristic_; it is to be
 But, in
 In fact, it
specifying a certain relation between the two simple motions of
describes it will be decomposed at each instant.
general conception of what constitutes _a system of co-ordinates_, and
nothing else but the _equation_ of the proposed line, in a system of
considered.
evidently be regarded as being immediately the _polar equation_ of this
 In the same way,
being the curve generated by a point which moves in such a manner that
constant--gives at once, for either the one or the other curve, the
which the position of a point would be determined by its distances from
 In
directly, for that curve, the equation _y_ = _mx_; adopting as the
invariable radius, measuring from the point of contact of that circle
contact to a certain origin taken on that right line.
analogous and equally easy verifications with respect to the customary
 We shall constantly find
immediately obtain a very simple equation of the proposed line, by
generation considered.

the necessary representation of every line by an equation, the preceding
characterizing with precision the principal general difficulty which
consequently furnishing an interesting indication with respect to the
could not admit of complete and invariable rules.
definition whatever of a line, at least among those which indicate a
certain system of co-ordinates, or, rather, of itself constitutes that
discovering the equation of a curve, by means of certain of its
must proceed essentially only from the commonly imposed condition of
co-ordinates, instead of admitting indifferently all possible systems.
These different systems cannot be regarded in analytical geometry as
which will be hereafter discussed, geometers think that curves should
co-ordinates_, properly so called.
in many cases these particular co-ordinates will not be those with
directly established by the proposed definition.
difficulty presented by the formation of the equation of a line really

establishment of these equations to a truly complete general method, the
subject, is evidently chimerical: but such a view may throw much useful
the end proposed.
preparatory equation, which is spontaneously derived from the definition
equation belonging to the system of co-ordinates which must be finally
co-ordinates those which naturally correspond to the given mode of
 It is upon this last labour that it is evidently impossible
 We can only say that we shall
analytical geometry, that is, as we shall know the algebraical





which serves as the base of analytical geometry, I have yet to notice
which is in general the most suitable.
explanation of the preference unanimously accorded to the ordinary
effect of an empirical sentiment of the superiority of this system, than


_ In order to decide clearly between all
distinguish with care the two general points of view, the converse of
of algebra to geometry, founded upon the representation of lines by
founded on the representation of equations by lines.

fundamental points of view are of necessity always found combined,
so to say, from geometrical to analytical considerations, and from
 But the necessity of here
question of method which we are examining is, in fact, as we shall see
without this distinction we could not form any clear idea of it.

1.
_ Under _the first point of
could lead us to prefer one system of co-ordinates to another would be
facility in arriving at it.
exist, and could not be expected to exist, any system of co-ordinates
 In
proposed we can conceive a system of co-ordinates in which the equation
very simple; and this system, moreover, inevitably varies with the
 The
advantageous for this object, although it may often be very favourable;
not be preferred to it, as well as to every other.

2.
_ It is by no means so,
 We can, indeed, easily
must necessarily be better adapted than any other to the representation
that this representation is constantly more simple and more faithful in

Let us consider, for this object, that, since every system of
lines, the system adapted to furnish the most suitable geometrical
a consideration which confines our choice to the _rectilinear_ system.
In truth, there is evidently an infinite number of systems which deserve
points, besides the ordinary system which assigns the distances from two
the co-ordinates of each point should be the two angles which the right
line, which joins these last points: so that this first consideration is
the common system.
of every system of co-ordinates, we also perceive that each of the two
offer at every instant, among its different conditions of determination,
co-ordinate, all the rest being fixed, and constituting the _axes_ of
acceptation.
able to consider all possible positions; and the fixity is no less so,
 Thus, in all
a fixed condition, and the ordinate will result from the variable


_ From these considerations it
the construction of geometrical _loci_ will necessarily be that in which
possible; the fixed condition being left free to be made complex, if
 Now, of all possible manners of
is certainly that in which, the direction of each right line remaining
constant axis.
figure to one's self clearly the changes of place of a point which is
around a fixed point, making a greater or smaller angle with a certain
 Such is the
common rectilinear system, of being better adapted than any other to the
which it is the easiest to conceive the change of place of a point
 In order to
to carefully compare this system with the polar system, in which this
moving parallel, each one of them, to its corresponding axis, is
circles, cut by a right line compelled to turn about a fixed point.
is, moreover, easy to conceive in advance what must be the extreme
elementary, which, for that reason, must be recurring at every instant,


_ In pursuing farther the consideration
co-ordinates over any other as to the representation of equations, we
of taking the two axes perpendicular to each other, whenever possible,
 As regards the representation of
proper than we have seen the general nature of the system to be; since,
may deserve our preference in that respect.
view, it is easy to see that rectangular axes constantly permit us to
with oblique axes, space being divided by them into regions which no
_locus_ of the equation extends into all these regions at once, there
differences of figure which do not correspond to any analytical
representation, by being confounded with the proper results of the
 For example, an equation like: _x^m_ + _y^m_ =
composed of four identical quarters, will be represented, on the
four parts of which will be unequal.
avoiding all inconveniences of this kind is to suppose the angle of the

The preceding discussion clearly shows that, although the ordinary
others in one of the two fundamental points of view which are
it is not constantly inferior, its necessary and absolute greater
receive the preference; although it may evidently happen, in some
obtaining them more easily may determine geometers to adopt a less
 The rectilinear system is, therefore, the one by means
general geometry, intended to express analytically the most important
 When it is thought necessary to choose some
this system being of a nature sufficiently opposite to that of the
with respect to the latter, to become, in general, sufficiently simple
 Polar co-ordinates, moreover, have often the
signification; as is the case in mechanics, for the geometrical
almost all the cases of celestial geometry.


fundamental conception of analytical geometry only with respect to
great philosophical renovation produced by Descartes.
important explanation, we have now to show summarily how this elementary
general study of _surfaces_ and _curves of double curvature_.
considerations which have been already given will permit me to limit
peculiar to this new case.


SURFACES.

_Determination of a Point in Space.
determination of a point in space evidently requires the values of three
generally adopted, and which corresponds to the _rectilinear_ system of
perpendicular to one another; which presents the point as the
 We might
which would determine it by the intersection of three spheres with a
 In like manner, the position of a point would be defined
distance, by means of the two angles which this right line makes with
dimensions; the point is then constructed by the intersection of a
whose axes and common summit do not change.
evidently, in this case at least, the same infinite variety among the
in geometry of two dimensions.
as being always determined by the intersection of any three surfaces
these three surfaces has, in like manner, all its conditions of
corresponding co-ordinates, whose peculiar geometrical influence is thus

This being premised, it is clear that if the three co-ordinates of a
successively all possible positions in space.
compelled to remain upon a certain surface defined in any manner
its situation at each instant, since the proposed surface will take the
 We must then,
this last co-ordinate as a determinate function of the two others, these
 Thus there will be
be permanent, and which will be the only one, in order to correspond to


_ This equation, more or less easy
of the proposed surface, since it must be verified for all the points of
 If the surface undergoes any change
more or less serious corresponding modification.
geometrical phenomena relating to surfaces will admit of being
equations of three variables; and in the establishment and
consist the science of analytical geometry of three dimensions.

_Expression of Equations by Surfaces.
conception in the inverse point of view, we see in the same manner that
geometrically by a determinate surface, primitively defined by the very
retain the mutual relation enunciated in this equation.
locus will evidently change, for the same equation, according to the
representation.
clear that in the equation between the three variables, _x_, _y_, _z_,
at _x_ and _y_, the geometrical locus of which will be a certain line
distance from this last equal to the value of _z_; so that the complete
of lines superimposed in a series of parallel planes (excepting the
surface.
co-ordinates, although the geometrical construction of the equation

Such is the elementary conception, the complement of the original idea

which have been above indicated, with respect to lines, and which any
of a surface by any method of generation whatever is really a direct
determine among all the different systems of possible co-ordinates that
 I will only add, on this
system, as to the representation of equations, is evidently still more
because of the incomparably greater geometrical complication which would
 This can be verified in the
which is the most employed after the ordinary rectilinear system, for

In order to complete the general exposition of the fundamental
examination should be made of a final improvement of the highest
theory, for the classification of surfaces in natural families,
algebraically by common differential equations, or by finite equations





geometry of three dimensions; that relating to the algebraic
manner.
employed, that of the degree of indetermination of the geometrical
is evident, as a general principle, that when a point is required to be
completely determining its position, by the intersection of this curve
 Thus, in this
functions necessarily determinate and distinct from the first.
follows that every line, considered in space, is then represented
equations between the three co-ordinates of any one of its points.
clear, indeed, from another point of view, that since each of these
combination presents the proposed line as the intersection of two
 Such is the most general manner of conceiving the
dimensions.
manner, when we confine ourselves to considering a line as determined by
a system characterized, analytically, by this peculiarity, that each of
co-ordinates, instead of simultaneously including the three variables.
This consideration, which consists in regarding the line as the
axes of the co-ordinates, besides the inconvenience of being confined to
ourselves to it, of introducing useless difficulties into the analytical
would evidently not be always the most suitable for forming the
 Thus, considering this fundamental notion in its
among the infinite number of couples of surfaces, the intersection of
the best to the establishment of equations, as being composed of the
 Thus, if the problem is to express analytically a
intersection of a sphere and a plane, rather than as proceeding from any

In truth, this manner of conceiving the representation of lines by
nature, a necessary inconvenience, that of a certain analytical
with the same system of co-ordinates, by an infinite number of different
surfaces which can form it; a circumstance which may cause some
disguises of which it admits.
causing this inconvenience to disappear; it consists in giving up the

established for a certain line, to be able to deduce from it the system
for example, to that of the two cylindrical surfaces which _project_ the
evidently be always identical, in whatever manner the line may have been
change.
simple, we shall generally be able to deduce from the primitive
by transforming them, by two successive eliminations, into two
thereby corresponding to the two surfaces of projection.
the principal destination of this sort of geometrical combination, which
identity of lines in spite of the diversity of their equations, which is





under its principal elementary aspects, it is proper, in order to make
presented by this conception with respect to both geometry and to

_Relatively to geometry_, we must remark that the equations are as yet
determinate portions of those loci.
some circumstances, to be able to express analytically a part of a line
a series of sections belonging to distinct geometrical figures, such as
 Thermology,
present analytical geometry is necessarily inapplicable.
M.
this great gap, and have thereby introduced a new and essential
 But this
on the employment of trigonometrical series proceeding according to the
definite integrals equivalent to those series, and the general integral
being immediately introduced into the system of analytical geometry.

to conceive a geometrical representation of equations containing four,
equations of two or of three variables admit, must not be viewed as an
belongs to the very nature of the subject.
more general than geometry, since it relates to all possible phenomena,
geometrical phenomena alone a concrete representation of all the laws

There exists, however, another imperfection of less importance, which
analytical geometry.
present representation of equations of two or of three variables by
locus we pay regard only to the _real_ solutions of equations, without
 The general course of these
the others of a geometrical representation.
omission that the graphic picture of the equation is constantly
representation at all when the equation admits of only imaginary
 But, even in this last case, we evidently ought to be able to
example,
  _x²_ + _y²_ + 1 = 0, _x⁶_ + _y⁴_ + 1 = 0, _y²_ + _e^x_ = 0.

it, in analytical geometry of two or of three dimensions, a number of
not corresponding to any geometrical phenomena.


geometry shows us clearly that this science consists essentially in
geometrical phenomenon belonging to lines or to surfaces; and,
such an analytical consideration.
important general questions would show us how geometers have succeeded
on geometrical science, regarded as a whole, its present eminently

     _Note.
     course to the more detailed examination of Analytical Geometry of
     separate work upon this branch of mathematics has been thought to
     present volume.


obtained from the astronomical observations.
to deduce herefrom the real or _absolute_ attributes of the stars, which

The apparent attributes of the stars are studied by the aid of their
 The characteristics of this radiation may be described in

)
From the statistical point of view it will be convenient to consider the
radiating body (the star).
attributes, which may differ in degree from one particle to another.
These attributes may be, for instance, the diameter and form of the
 By these attributes the optical
 I shall
property which the particles have of possessing a different mode of
another.
the particles.
which, with a terminology derived from the undulatory theory of

The statistical characteristics of the radiation are then in the first


nearly identical with) the _effective_ wave-length or the colour;
(3) _the dispersion of the wave-length_.
radiation may be determined from the _spectrum_, which also gives the
wave-length of the radiation.

the sky.

wave-length are in a simple manner connected with the _temperature_
 According to the radiation laws of STEPHAN and WIEN
 M.
to the fourth power of _T_, whereas the mean wave-length and the
 It
diminishes--the colour changing into violet--and simultaneously the
spectrum are reduced (decrease).

2.
ascension (α) and its declination (δ).
distribution of the stars in space, it is, however, more practical to
its galactic latitude (_b_).
will be generally used in the following pages, it should be pointed out
in a particular manner.
that if for instance α = 17h 44m.
84, we shall write
    (αδ) = (174435).

84, we write
    (αδ) = (1744{35}),
so that the last two figures are in italics.

are enclosed in braces to represent the italics.

used by him everywhere in the Annals of the Harvard Observatory, but it
 This notation gives, simultaneously,
 It is true that two or more
 They
attributes.

(the Galaxy) as plane of reference.
according to HOUZEAU and GOULD the position (αδ) = (124527).
distribution of the stars of the spectral type B I have in L.
 II,
 But having ascertained later
of stars for an accurate determination of its value, I have preferred to
(αδ) = (124028), or
    α = 12h 40m = 190°, δ = +28°,
which position is now exclusively used in the stellar statistical
lectures.

Milky Way on the equator, which is situated in the constellation
 The galactic latitude (_b_) gives the angular distance of the
 On plate I, at the end of these lectures, will be
a star into _l_ and _b_ may be easily performed.
apparent magnitude brighter than 4m are directly drawn.

content ourselves with giving the galactic _square_ in which the star is
 For this purpose we assume the sky to be divided into 48
 Two of these squares lie at the
 Twelve lie
are designated GC_1, GC_2, .
.
 The corresponding squares south
.
.
 The two polar squares at the south pole are called GF_1 and
 Finally we have 10 B-squares, between the A- and C-squares and 10

The distribution of the squares in the heavens is here graphically
giving areas proportional to the corresponding spherical areas, an
statistical researches.
continuous representation of the whole sky.

from plate II.
longitude we find north of the galactic equator (in the C-squares) the

    Pyxis, Vela, Centaurus, Scorpius, Ophiuchus,
and south of this equator (in the D-squares):--
    Aquila, Cygnus, Lacerta, Andromeda, Perseus, Orion, Canis Major,


At the north galactic pole (in the two A-squares) we have:--
    Canes Venatici and Coma Berenices,
and at the south galactic pole (in the two F-squares):--
    Cetus and Sculptor.

3.
_ From the positions of a star on
_proper motion_ of the star.
of this motion and a _periodical_ part.
either a reflex of the motion of the observer, and is then called

distance from the sun, or its parallax.
motion is caused by the motion of the earth around the sun, and gives
 In order to obtain available annual
to us than 5 siriometers, corresponding to a parallax greater than
04.
distance amounting to 10 siriometers (π = 0″.
values.
by the progressive motion of the sun in space, may give better results,
determined.
KAPTEYN, the _systematic_ parallax of the stars.

specification, we mean always the secular proper motion.

4.
universally expressed in kilometres.
inappropriate unit for celestial distances.
in our planetary system, the astronomers, since the time of NEWTON, have
unit of distance.
astronomers have had a varying practice.
and others, have long used a stellar unit of distance corresponding to
2, which has been called a “Siriusweite”.
this name it may be justly objected that it has no international use, a
 Against the theoretical definition of this
through another distance and not through an angle--an angle which
the star and not to its arithmetic mean distance.
be made to the unit “parsec.

For my part I have, since 1911, proposed a stellar unit which, both in
and which will be exclusively used in these lectures.
put equal to 10^6 times the planetary unit of distance, corresponding to
206265 (in practice sufficiently exactly 0″.

In popular writings, another unit: a _light-year_, has for a very long
 The relation between these units is
    1 siriometer = 15.
    1 light-year =  0.


 In regard to _time_ also, the terrestrial units (second, day, year)
 As being consistent with the unit of
(st.
 We thus obtain the same relation
has the advantage that a _velocity_ of a star expressed in siriometers
of length per year.

DOPPLER-principle, are generally expressed in km.
 The

/sec.
2111 sir.
,
2111 planetary units per year,
/st.
7375 km.

Thus the velocity of the sun is 20 km.
 or 4.
/st.
22

Of the numerical value of the stellar velocity we shall have opportunity
 For the present it may suffice to mention
(in the mean somewhat greater), and that the highest observed velocity
/st.
/sec.
 In the next chapter I
 The least value of the


 _Intensity of the radiation.
 The
the greatest instrument of the Mount Wilson observatory (100 inch
is itself more than 10000 million times fainter than the sun--speaking

The intensity is expressed in _magnitudes_ (_m_).
that we should otherwise necessarily have to deal with very large
that it is proved that the human eye apprehends quantities of light as

This depends upon a general law in psycho-physics, known as FECHNER's
proportional not to the changes of the intensity but to these changes
 A similar law is valid for all
 A conversation is inaudible in the vicinity of a waterfall.
An increase of a load in the hand from nine to ten hectograms makes no
hectograms is easily appreciable.
no increase in the illumination, and so on.

that the impression increases in _arithmetical_ progression (1, 2, 3, 4,
.
) simultaneously with an increase of the intensity in _geometrical_
.
).
same as with the hearing.
vibrations of the notes of a harmonic scale follow each other in a
notes are apprehended as equal.
relation to the quantities of light as do the logarithms to the
 If a star is considered to have a brightness
_ratio_ of the quantities of light that is equal in each case.

radiation is called _photometry_.
for the magnitudes we must choose, in a certain manner, the _zero-point_

Both may be chosen arbitrarily.
unanimously chosen by astronomers in accordance with that used by the
 No rigorous definition of the Harvard zero-point,
 A.
but considering that the Pole-star (α Ursæ Minoris) is used at Harvard
according to the observations at Harvard and those of HERTZSPRUNG (A.

may say that _the zero-point of the photometric scale is chosen in such
12_.
in another scale than the Harvard-scale (H.
), it is necessary to
 This amounts, for the Potsdam
16.

 Our magnitudes
 It was found that the
consecutive classes of magnitudes--according to the older values of the
 When exact photometry began
century, the scale-ratio was therefore put equal to 2.
 Later it was
512, the logarithm of
4.
logarithms of a kind, it is evidently more convenient to use a simple
itself.
POGSON in his “Catalogue of 53 known variable stars”, Astr.
 of the

It follows from the definition of the scale-ratio that two stars for
magnitudes.
of the first magnitude, a star of the 11th magnitude 10000 times, of the
million times fainter than a star of the first magnitude.
magnitudes are now, with a certain reservation for systematic errors,
1, and closer.
there will correspond to an error of 0.
uncertainty in the light ratios, when these differ considerably from

    Sun         -26m.
    Full moon   -11m.
    Venus       - 4m.
    Jupiter     - 2m.
    Mars        - 1m.
    Mercury     - 0m.
    Saturn      + 0m.
    Uranus      + 5m.
    Neptune     + 7m.

_negative_ magnitudes (as well as with negative logarithms).
example, for _Sirius_ _m_ = -1.
 The magnitudes of the greater
will be seen from the adjoining table, where the values are taken from
 MÜLLER.

 The other
value of the apparent magnitude of the moon and the planets.

58.
magnitude of the faintest visible star evidently depends on the
 The telescope of WILLIAM
researches, allowed of the discerning of stars down to the 14th
 The large instruments of our time hardly reach much farther,
 When, however, photographic plates are used, it
modest instruments.
renders possible the photographic observations of stars of the 20th

The observations of visual magnitudes are performed almost exclusively


 _Absolute magnitude.
the star changes its distance from the observer, the intensity
 In
is convenient to reduce them to their value at a certain unit of
 As such we choose one siriometer.
will be called the _absolute_ magnitude and is denoted by _M_.
easily find from the table given in the preceding paragraph that the
amounts to +3.
2.
6,
3.

For the absolute magnitudes of those stars for which it has hitherto
between -8 and +13.
the absolutely brightest and faintest stars now known.

8.
_ The magnitudes which have been mentioned
eye, and are called _visual_ magnitudes.
is, however, essentially dependent on the instrument used in measuring
 Besides the eye, the astronomers use a photographic
 The
circumstance that different parts of the radiation are taken into

The usual photographic plates, which have their principal sensibility in
of the stars.
vary from one plate to another, according to the distributive function
 M.
 This variation, which has not yet been
must be neglected in the following.

by _m′_, corresponding to a visual magnitude _m_.

of a certain preparation (in colour baths or in other ways), have
eye, and especially have a maximum point at the same wave-lengths.
magnitudes are called _photo-visual_ (compare the memoir of PARKHURST in
 J.

The photographic magnitude of a star is generally determined from
 A simple
 The diameter of
 This increase is due
spherical aberration of the objective, to irregular grinding of the
produce an oscillation of the image around a mean position.

this magnitude coincides with the visual magnitude for such stars as
0, according to the

Determinations of the photographic or photo-visual magnitudes may now be
 The methods for this are many and are
 A.
 of the year
 The most effective and far-reaching method seems to be that
exposures are taken of the same part of the sky, while at one of the
constant degree.

9.
_ The radiation of a star is different for
 As regarding other mass phenomena we may
the _mean wave-length_ (λ_0), (3) the _dispersion of the wave-length_
 In the preceding paragraphs we have treated of the total radiation
 The mean
dispersion of the wave-length is found from the _spectrum_ of the stars.

intermediate colours.
the mean wave-length (and not conversely) or the _effective_ wave-length
 We shall
 There are, however, a great many direct

_Colour corresponding to a given spectrum.

_    _Colour_       _Number_
     A0        YW-            788
     F5        YW, WY-        295
     K5        WY+, Y-        552
     -----------------------------
.
 2222
_Spectrum corresponding to a given colour.

_       _Number_
     YW-            A0           356
     YW+, YW-       F3           211
     WY+, Y-        K1           289
     RY-, RY        K5            85
                        Sum .
.


The preceding table drawn up by Dr.
observations of MÜLLER and KEMPF in Potsdam, shows the connection

The Potsdam observations contain all stars north of the celestial
5.

in the correlation between the spectra and the colours of the stars.
Taking together all white stars we find the corresponding mean spectral
yellow-white.
K-stars have upon an average a shade of white in the yellow colour.
coefficient of correlation (_r_) is not easy to compute in this case,
(_i.
_ it is not expressed in numbers defining the colour).
the coefficient of contingency of PEARSON, it is, however, possible to
MALMQUIST has in this way found _r_ = +0.

In order to facilitate the discussion of the relation between colour and
of the stars.

10.
_ In order to introduce the discussion I first
spectrum, and the corresponding chemical elements.

       A                                   759.
       B                                   686.
       C(α)               H (hydrogen)     656.
       D_1                Na (sodium)      589.
       D_3                He               587.
       E                  Fe (iron)        527.
       F(β)               H                486.
        (γ)               H                434.
       G                  Ca (calcium)     430.
       h(δ)               H                410.
       H(ε)               Ca(H)            396.
       K                  Ca               393.


 The second column
attributed.
millionths of a millimeter as unit (μμ).

to the Harvard system is reproduced, will be found also the wave-lengths

By the visual spectrum is usually understood the part of the radiation
photographic spectrum generally lies between F and K (λ = 500 to 400

In the earliest days of spectroscopy the spectra of the stars were
 This classification was
 The
classification into white, yellow, and red stars.
almost entirely taken the place of visual observations of spectra, so
longer applicable.
and Miss CANNON and embraces a great many types, of which we here
 II of Vol.
XXVIII of the Annals of the Harvard Observatory.
PICKERING first arranged the types in alphabetical order A, B, C, &c.
supposing that order to correspond to the temperature of the stars.
Later this was found to be partly wrong, and in particular it was found
 The following is
Harvard astronomers.

 The spectra of these stars consist mainly
 They are characterized by the bright bands at
gaseous nebulae is sometimes present.


22.
absolute magnitude of these stars nearly coincides with that of the

The type is grouped into five subdivisions represented by the letters
 These subdivisions are conditioned by the varying
 The due sequence of these

Among interesting stars of this type is ζ Puppis (Od), in the spectrum
lines.
called “additional lines of hydrogen”.

 All lines are here dark.
the hydrogen series we here find the He-lines (396, 403, 412, 414, 447,

To this type belong all the bright stars (β, γ, δ, ε, ζ, η and others)
 Further, Spica and many other

On plate III ε Orionis is taken as representative of this type.

hydrogen lines (compare plate III).


The greater part of the stars visible to the naked eye are found here.
There are 1251 stars brighter than the 6th magnitude which belong to
 Sirius, Vega, Castor, Altair, Deneb and others are all

_Type F_ (Calcium type).
not so broad as in the preceding type.
(396.
4 μμ) strongly pronounced.

(compare the third chapter), such as Polaris, Canopus, Procyon.

 Numerous metallic lines together with relatively

To this class belong the sun, Capella, α Centauri and other bright

_Type K.
 The K-line attains its
III).

the bright stars.

Aldebaran, which last forms a transition to the next type.

_ The spectrum is banded and belongs to SECCHI's third type.
flutings are due to titanium oxide.


Herculis, β Pegasi, α Scorpii (Antares) and most variables of long
hydrogen lines together with the flutings.


_Type N_ (SECCHI's fourth type).
 The flutings are due to

Here are found only faint stars.
 All are red.
27 stars having this spectrum are variables of long period of the same

The spectral types may be summed up in the following way:--
    White stars:--SECCHI's type I:--Harvard B and A,
    Red     "  :--   "      " III:--   "    M,

The Harvard astronomers do not confine themselves to the types mentioned
are designated by the name of the type followed by a numeral 0, 1, 2,
.
, 9.
A2, .
.
 Exceptions are made as already indicated, for the


 _Spectral index.
the definition of the types implies many vague moments.
regard to the G-type are very different definitions indeed accepted,
[6] It is also a defect that the definitions do not
 None the
scale expressing the spectral character of a star.
indeed implicit in the Harvard classification of the spectra.

the spectral character of a star.
conception in the following way.
_s_ = 0.
0, G0 to _s_ = +2.
0 M0 to
0 and B0 to _s_ = -1.
 Further, let A1, A2, A3, &c.
spectral indices +0.
2, +0.
, and in like manner with the
 Then it is evident that to all spectral

 Their spectral indices

Though the spectral indices, defined in this manner, are directly known
of spectral indices corresponds to a continuous series of values of some
 This may be seen to be possible from a
graduated, namely the colour of the stars.
in another paragraph.
will finally be necessary to change to some extent the definitions of
accomplished.

12.
by means of the total intensity (_I_), the mean wave-length (λ_0) and
 λ_0 and σ_λ may be deduced from
 It must here be observed that the
the values of these intensities as they are apprehended by the
 For the
function of the instrument (L.
 67).
believe, from the bolometric observations of LANGLEY (1888), that the
that of the true intensity-curve, a conclusion easily understood from
course of time shall be developed in such a way that the mean
true curve (λ = 530 μμ), when the greatest visual energy is obtained (L.
M.
 As to the dispersion, this is always greater in the true
it amounts to approximately 60 μμ.
intensity curve is extended, approximately, from 400 μμ to 760 μμ, a
dispersion σ of the visual curve.

different.
approximately, 450 μμ, with a dispersion of 16 μμ, which is considerably


 Both the visual and the photographic curves of intensity differ
different for stars of different spectral types.
wave-length follows the formula of WIEN, which says that this
 The total intensity,
the temperature.
the temperature--directly as the mean wave-length, inversely as the
 M.
well as the dispersion of the wave-length, is smaller for the hot stars
 It is in this manner
its mean wave-length (λ_0) or from the dispersion in λ.
determinations (from λ_0) have been made by SCHEINER and WILSING in
be developed to a greater degree of accuracy.

14.
_ The mean wave-length of a spectrum, or, as
generally determined in the following way.
in the air the image of a star is, without the use of a spectroscope,
 After some time of exposure we get a somewhat round
wave-length.
_objective-grating_, which consists of a series of metallic threads,
 On account of the
with the use of these gratings, not only a fainter image of the star at
sides of this image secondary images, the distances of which from the
wave-lengths.
effective wave-length, and this being a tolerably well-known function of
 This method was first
LUNDMARK and LINDBLAD at the observatory of Upsala and by others.

15.
_ We have already pointed out in §9 that the colour
 As further λ_0 is
index to represent the colour.
another expression for the colour, called the colour-index.
expression was first introduced by SCHWARZSCHILD, and is defined in the

We have seen that the zero-point of the photographic scale is chosen in
magnitude _m′_ coincide for stars of spectral index 0.
 The
 It is found
that for type B (and O) the photographic magnitudes are smaller than the
 The difference is greatest
present only a few determinations are known), for which stars if amounts
 So much fainter is a red star on a

_The difference between the photographic and the visual magnitudes is
_ The correlation between this index and
96).
 M.
II, 19 I have deduced the following tables giving the spectral-type

From each catalogue of visual magnitudes of the stars we may obtain
 This may
correlation between _s_ and _c_) as soon as we know the spectral type of
 We may conclude directly that the number of stars having a
0 is considerably smaller than
 There are,
0 and 2874 stars having _m′_ < 6.


 _Radial velocity of the stars.
different times we obtain the components of the proper motions of the
 The third component (_W_), in
measuring the displacement of the lines in the spectrum, this
is receding from or approaching the observer.

(sir.
) and alternately also in km.
 The rate of conversion of


 Summing up the remarks here given on the apparent attributes of the

 _The position of the stars_ is here generally given in galactic
 Moreover their equatorial
first four numbers give the right ascension in hours and minutes and the
printed in italics if the declination is negative.


II.
components (_W_) expressed in sir.
 and their motion perpendicular to
 These components will be expressed in one component
perpendicular to it.
convert these components into components of the linear velocity

III.
magnitudes.
and the _absolute_ magnitude (_M_), the latter being equal to the value
distance of one siriometer.

(_m′_), obtained from a photographic plate, or the _visual_ magnitude

The difference between these magnitudes is called the _colour-index_

IV.
wave-length (λ_0) and the dispersion (σ) in the wave-length.
wave-length_ may be either directly determined (perhaps as _effective_
the colour-index.

the observations:--the spherical position of the star (_l_, _b_), its
apparent magnitude (_m_ or _m′_), absolute magnitude (_M_), spectral
 Of these
a certain degree) the radial velocity may be considered as independent
apparent but also as _absolute_ attributes of the stars.

relation exists so that one of them is known as soon as the other two

FOOTNOTES:
[Footnote 1: Meddelanden från Lunds Observatorium, No.
]
[Footnote 2: Meddelanden från Lunds Astronomiska Observatorium, Serie
 14.

 50.

distance corresponding to a parallax of 1″ we may subtract 3m.
 To
1 we may add
57.
statistics.

of OSTHOFF.

 A.
 A.
 M.
19.


CHAPTER II.



 In this chapter I shall give a short account of the publications in
be obtained, with short notices of the contents and genesis of these
 It is, however, not my intention to give a history of
 We shall consider more particularly the questions
spectra.

19.
_ _Durchmusterungs.
the position of the stars are obtained from the star catalogues known as
 There are two such catalogues, which together cover
Durchmusterung_ (B.
), the other--photographic--performed in Cape _The
 P.
).
catalogues has long been--and is to some extent even now--our principal
this kind, I shall give a somewhat detailed account of its origin and
 D.

 D.
Memel 1799).
then in Hälsingfors, and from there went in 1836 to Bonn, where in the
 As
a focal length of 650 mm, and 10 times magnifying power.
sight had an extension of 6°.

with the edge (= the diameter of the semicircle) parallel to the circle
 This edge was sharply ground, so that it formed a
 Perpendicular to this
drawn at a distance of 7′.
on the glass.

 A
easily look over 2° in declination.
below, separated by a board floor, at the _Thiede_ clock.

at a certain declination (whole degrees).
a distance smaller than one degree from the middle line are observed.
Hence the name “Durchmusterung”.
magnitude is called out by A, and noted by B together with the time of
 Simultaneously the declination is noted by A in the darkness.
On some occasions 30 stars may be observed in a minute.

 25, 1852, the last on March 27,
 In all there were 625 observation nights with 1841 “zones”.
total number of stars was 324198.

1859, 1861 and 1862[7] and embraces all stars between the pole and 2°
5, according to the scale of

 The catalogue is arranged in accordance
ascension.
 D.
 D.
174, which
 174.

by SCHÖNFELD, according to much the same plan, but with a larger
times).
133659 stars.

 D.
ascension and in tenths of a minute in declination.

20.
 P.
).
the whole southern sky from -18° to the south pole.
photographs were taken at the Cape Observatory with a DALLMEYER lens
 aperture and a focal-length of 135 cm.

 The
 The measurements of
measuring-apparatus specially constructed for this purpose, which
declination of the stars.
to 1898.
1900.

 D.
stars is 454875.
the magnitude 9m.

In the two great catalogues B.
 and C.
 D.
registered down to the magnitude 9.
this limit.

A third great Durchmusterung has for some time been in preparation at
[10] It continues the southern zones of SCHÖNFELD

All these Durchmusterungs are ultimately based on star catalogues of
 Of these catalogues we shall not

A great “Durchmusterung”, that will include all stars to the 11th
observatories proposed by the congress in Paris, 1888.
proceed very irregularly, and there is little prospect of getting the


 _Star charts.
star charts, embracing the whole heaven:--The _Harvard Map_ (H.
) and
 A.
).

glass has kindly been placed at the disposal of the Lund Observatory by
 PICKERING, embraces all stars down to the 11th magnitude.
consists of 55 plates, each embracing more than 900 square degrees of
 The photographs were taken with a small lens of only 2.

5 cms.
 The time of exposure was one
 These plates have been counted at the Lund Observatory by Hans
 We return later to these counts.

FRANKLIN-ADAMS, partly at his own observatory (Mervel Hill) in England,
 The
 aperture and a
, which gives rather good images on a field of 15

The whole sky is here reproduced on, in all, 206 plates.
exposed for 2 hours and 20 minutes and gives images of the stars down to
 The original plates are now at the observatory in
 Some copies on paper have been made, of which the Lund
 It shows stars down to the 14th-15th
indeed, than can be obtained, even for the north sky, by direct
Sweden.

 A.
 have been counted by the astronomers of the Lund
the whole heaven down to the 14th magnitude has been obtained.
later have an opportunity of discussing the results of these counts.

mentioned in the preceding paragraph.
 d.
) is
day see this work carried to completion.
the 14th magnitude and thus does not reach so far as the F.
 C.
on the other hand is carried out on a considerably greater scale and
 A.
 and will therefore be of a great value
stars.

22.
_ As the determination, from the annual
distance exceeds 5 sir.
04), it is only natural that the
 The most
XXVI (1909), of KAPTEYN and WEERSMA in the publications of Groningen Nr.
24 (1910), embracing 365 stars, and of WALKEY in the “Journal of the

this number considerably, so that the distance of all stars, for which
 ADAMS


 _Proper motions.
the stars is LEWIS BOSS's “Preliminary General Catalogue of 6188 stars”
 P.
).
the sixth magnitude (with few exceptions) and moreover some fainter
 The catalogue is considered by the editor only as a preliminary
nearly completed.

24.
_ The Harvard observatory has, under the
magnitudes of the stars, and the history of this observatory is at the
 PICKERING, in
the sky visible from the Harvard observatory, but has also founded a
 It is
heaven from pole to pole.
magnitudes of the stars is found in the “Annals of the Harvard
 50” (H.
 It contains 9110 stars and can be considered
5.
referred the magnitudes which have been adopted at the Observatory of

A very important, and in one respect even still more comprehensive,
 G.
C.
 50.
It contains the magnitude of 14199 stars and embraces all stars on the
5 (according to B.
).
already seen that the zero-point of H.
 G.
 is somewhat
 G.
 must be increased by
16 if they are to be reduced to the Harvard scale.
between the two catalogues however is due to some extent to the colour
 MÜLLER and KEMPF.

25.
_ Our knowledge of this subject is still
 The most comprehensive catalogue is the
magnitudes of all stars in B.
 down to the magnitude 7m.
equator and a declination of +20°.
 The photographic

These is also a photometric photographic catalogue of the stars nearest
contains all stars in B.
 brighter than 7m.
northern declination.

During the last few years the astronomers of Harvard and Mount Wilson
faint stars.
lie in the immediate neighbourhood of the pole.
down to the 20th magnitude.
magnitudes are given in H.
 71, 85 and 101.

e.
photographic and the visual magnitudes) will be found in L.
 II, 19.
When the visual magnitude and the type of spectrum are known, the
accuracy, by adding the colour-index according to the table 1 in §15


 _Stellar spectra.
the leading one.
Observatory (H.
magnitudes, also gives the spectral types for all the stars there
e.
5.
Observatory, deserves the principal credit for this great work.
content with this result she is now publishing a still greater work
 The first four volumes of this work
ascension, so that half the work is now printed.

27.
_ In this matter, again, we find America to be the
Wilson but the Lick Observatory to which we have to give the honour.
eminent director of this observatory, W.
 CAMPBELL, has in a high
and has moreover carried out such determinations in a large scale.
“Bulletin” No.
velocity of 915 stars.
possible card catalogues of the attributes of the stars are collected,

[14]

 Finally I shall briefly mention some comprehensive works on more

On _variable stars_ there is published every year by HARTWIG in the
known variable stars with needful information about their minima &c.
This is the completest and most reliable of such catalogues, and is
 A complete historical catalogue of the variables is
als sicher veränderlich anerkannten Sterne nebst einem Katalog der
 MÜLLER und E.
 Leipzig

On _nebulae_ we have the excellent catalogues of DREYER, the “New
 G.
) of 1890 in the “Memoirs of the
 49, the “Index catalogues” (I.
) in the
 51 and 59 (1895 and 1908).
all together 13226 objects.

important Annals of the Harvard Observatory.
given in the following, as need arises.


Beobachtungen auf der Sternwarte zu Bonn, Dritter bis Fünfter Band.
1859-62.

 Achter Band der
]
[Footnote 9: “The Cape Photographic Durchmusterung” by DAVID GILL and J.
C.
 III-V (1896-1900).

 THOME.
National Argentine Observatory, vol.
]
[Footnote 11: Aph.
, vol.
]
[Footnote 12: H.
, vol.
]
[Footnote 13: H.
, vol.
]
[Footnote 14: A catalogue of radial velocities has this year been
 VOUTE, embracing 2071 stars.
velocities”, by J.
 Weltevreden, 1920.


CHAPTER III.



 The number of cases in which all the eight attributes of the stars
small, and certainly does not exceed one hundred.
principally to such stars as are characterized either by great
 The principal reason why these
solar system.
statistical points of view, it may therefore be of interest first to
emphasizing, however, the exceptional character of these stars, and
find.

30.
_ We begin with these objects so
 The following table
than 1m.

The first column gives the current number, the second the name, the
 It should be remembered that the
last two the declination, italics showing negative declination.
fourth column gives the galactic square, the fifth and sixth columns the
 The seventh and eighth columns give the

velocity _W_ expressed in sir.
 (To get km.
 we may multiply by
7375).
twelfth column the absolute magnitude (_M_), computed from _m_ with the
 The 13th column gives the type of spectrum (_Sp_), and the
 The difference between

_b_ are computed from (αδ) with the help of tables in preparation at the
the conversion of the equatorial coordinates into galactic ones.
values of π are generally taken from the table of KAPTEYN and WEERSMA
 The values of μ are obtained from B.
P.
, those of the radial velocity (_W_) from the card catalogue in

There are in all, in the sky, 20 stars having an apparent magnitude
5.
its brilliancy and position, is visible to the whole civilized world.
has a spectrum of the type A0 and hence a colour-index nearly equal to
0 (observations in Harvard give _c_ = +0.
 Its apparent magnitude
6, nearly the same as that of Mars in his opposition.
absolute magnitude is -0m.
e.
magnitude, from which we may conclude that it has a distance from us
 We find, indeed, from the eighth column
5 sir.
32 per year, which
be seen below.
towards us with a velocity of 1.
/st.
6 km.
), a rather
 The third column shows that its right ascension is 6h
 It lies in the square GD_7 and its

The next brightest star is _Canopus_ or α Carinæ at the south sky.
might place absolute confidence in the value of _M_ (= -8.
column this star would be, in reality, a much more imposing apparition
 Remembering that the apparent magnitude of the moon,
6, we should find that Canopus, if
5 sir.
would shine with a lustre equal to no less than a quarter of that of the
 It is not altogether astonishing that a fanciful astronomer should
stellar system.
distance is not less that 30 sir.
distances greater than 4 sir.
must generally be considered as rather uncertain.
is intimately dependent on that of _r_ we must consider speculations
 Another reason for a doubt about a
of spectrum which, according to the last column, is F0, a type which, as
 A better support for a
motion of this star.
having a negative value of the apparent visual magnitude.

 We may

In the fourth column is the galactic square.
these squares have the same area, and that there is therefore the same
another.
Way).
there are no less than 15 in the galactic equator squares and only 5
have been expected.
us to draw any cosmological conclusions from this distribution, but we
that are principally accumulated along the Milky Way and are scanty at
 We shall find that in these cases we may _generally_
_situated far from the sun_, while objects that are uniformly
 It is easy to understand
all star counts, that the stellar system extends much farther into space

If we could permit ourselves to draw conclusions from the small material
the bright stars lie relatively far from us.
conclude that the bright stars seem to be bright to us not because of
 Column
 Certainly the distances are not in
some degree, this uneven partition of the bright stars on the sky.
mean distance of these stars is as large as 7.
 Only α Centauri,
siriometer.
siriometers from our system.

considered as rather uncertain, we must regard them as being rather

As column 8 shows that these stars are rather far from us, so we find
 The mean
1.
greatest and most luminous stars in the stellar system have a negative

The mean value of the proper motions of the bright stars amounts to
56 per year and may be considered as rather great.
find that the mean proper motion of the stars down to the 6th magnitude
 On the other hand we
the influence of four of the stars which have a large proper motion,
 The other stars have a
the proper motion amounts to approximately 0″.
relatively great distance.

be found from column 10, giving their radial velocity, which in the mean
 From the discussion
rather small figure.
law in statistical mechanics, to which we return later, that stars with
 We thus find in the radial
bright stars are giants among the stars in our stellar system.

stars.
Spica, Regulus and β Crucis.
Altair, Fomalhaut and Deneb.
Procyon.
 To the K-type
stars Betelgeuze and Antares.
expression for the spectral types we find that the mean spectral index
1 corresponding to the spectral type F1.

31.
_ In table 3 I have collected
 The
names of the stars are here taken from different catalogues.

Groombridge designed as that which possesses the greatest known proper
 It is now distanced by two other stars C.
 D.
243
the Cape Photographic Durchmusterung, and BARNARD's star in Ophiuchus,
 The last-mentioned star, which possesses the greatest
magnitude, and lies at a distance of 0.
 from our sun and is
know the distance.
from column 10, and amounts to 19 sir.
 (= 90 km.
) in the
 The absolute magnitude of this star is 11m.
and it is, with the exception of one other, the very faintest star now
 Its spectral type is Mb, a fact worth fixing in our memory, as
contains the very faintest stars.
e.
proper motion) is so great that the star in 1000 years moves 3°, or as
 For this star, as well as for
year are sufficient for an approximate determination of the value of the
required.

unlike the brightest stars, they are not concentrated along the Milky
 On the contrary we find only 6 in the galactic equator squares and
 We shall not build up any conclusion on this
the preceding paragraph we conclude only that these stars must be
 This follows, indeed, directly from column 8, as not

87 sir.


these stars is seen from column 10, giving the radial velocities.
some of the stars (4) the radial velocity is for the present unknown,
amounting in the mean to 18 sir.
 (= 85 km.
), if no regard is
velocity of the sun.
sight, the absolute velocity is still greater, approximately equal to
 We conclude that the great
linear velocities of the stars.
cooperate may be seen from the absolute magnitudes (_M_).

equal, the means for both been approximately 7m.
of the fact that the mean distance of these stars is equal to one
 We find
_dwarf_ stars.
already mentioned small bodies upon an average have a great absolute
velocities of these stars.

yellow or red stars.
8, corresponding to
 If the stars of different types are put together we get the

      G         8                 5.
      K         4                 7.
      M         4                 9.

absolute magnitude increases with the spectral index.
however, is not generally valid.

32.
_ There are some kinds of
found.
ourselves to the stars.
possessed by the star (040822) of the eighth magnitude in the
sir.
 or 341 km.
 The nearest velocity is that of the star
 The
20 sir.
 (= 94.
/sec.
 It is based on the catalogue of VOUTE

Regarding their distribution in the sky we find 11 in the galactic
 A large radial velocity seems therefore
from us.
distance smaller than one siriometer and 2 at a distance smaller than 4
 Among the nearer ones we find the star (050744), identical
 P.
 5h.
motion.
very great linear velocity.
stars with large radial velocity possess also a large proper motion.
mean value of the proper motions amounts to 1″.

In the table we find no star with great apparent luminosity.
brightest is the 10th star in the table which has the magnitude 5.
 The
7.
see that most of these speedy stars, as well as the stars with great
thus are absolutely faint stars, though they perhaps may not be directly
 Their mean absolute magnitude is +3.

Regarding the spectrum we find that these stars generally belong to the
enough, two A-stars.
the letter _p_ (= peculiar), indicating that the spectrum in some

the wave-length 448.
find on plate III in the spectrum of Sirius, does not occur in the
appearance as in the case of the Sirius stars.
suppose that the absence of this line indicates a low power of radiation
33.
_ The star α in Centaurus was long considered as
 It has a parallax of 0″.
distance of 0.
26 light years).
obtained from the annual parallax with great accuracy, and the result is
companion of α Centauri).
observatory of Johannesburg in the Transvaal a star of the 10th
and which, in any case, lies at the same distance from the earth, or
 It is not possible at present to decide with accuracy
Centauri is our nearest neighbour.
whose large proper motion we have already mentioned.
 5 we find
 8 Procyon, as No.
 The others are of the third
 No.
the first star for which the astronomers, after long and painful
help of the annual parallax (BESSEL 1841).

tolerably uniform, as might have been predicted.
large proper motion, this being in the mean 3″.
 This was a
 The radial velocity
 This fact is

Their apparent magnitude is upon an average 6.
 The brightest of the
6), the faintest Proxima Centauri (_m_ =
 Through the systematic researches of the astronomers we may be sure
for which the distance is not already known and well determined.
following table contains without doubt--we may call them briefly all
magnitude brighter than 6m (the table has 8 such stars), and probably
than the eighth magnitude (the table has 13 such stars and two near the
 Regarding the stars of the eighth magnitude or fainter no
among these stars we may get from time to time a new star belonging to
 To determine
problems in stellar statistics, and to this question I shall return

following way:--
    _M_         0 1 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13

What is the absolute magnitude of the near stars that are not contained
 We may go
than 6m_ must be contained in this list.
brighter, _m_ must be brighter than 6m, if the star is nearer than one
 But we have assumed that all stars apparently brighter than
 Hence also all stars
 We conclude that
amounts to 8.

from the last column of the table that these stars are distributed in

    Number          0 2 2 5 9 3.


We find that the number of stars increases with the spectral index.
unknown stars in the siriometer sphere belong probably, in the main, to

If we now seek to form a conception of the _total_ number in this sphere
 EDDINGTON, in his “Stellar movements”,
calculation, and has found that we may expect to find in all 32 stars in
magnitude 9m.
 This makes 8 stars per cub.

We may attack the problem in other ways.
however, is not without importance, is the following.
that the Galaxy in the direction of the Milky Way has an extension of
extension of 50 sir.
this extension.

siriometers.
Galaxy would amount to 1000 millions, a value to which we shall also
 Then we conclude that the average number
 This supposes that the
 But the sun
(considerably) greater than the average density.
will be found in the mathematical part of these lectures, shows that the
density, giving 80 stars per cubic siriometer in the neighbourhood of
 A sphere having a radius of one siriometer
stars in all, within a sphere with a radius of one siriometer.
different reasons it is probable that this number is rather too great
something like 200 stars, of which more than a tenth is now known to the

We may also arrive at an evaluation of this number by proceeding from
 This
 We shall find in a later paragraph that

statistical series amounts upon an average to approximately 6 times the
 Hence we conclude that the dispersion (σ) of
should obtain σ = [13 + 8] : 6 = 3.
individuals the total range may amount to more than 6 σ).

magnitude brighter than 6 is known (we have obtained 8 : 4 = 2 stars per
number of stars per cubic siriometer (_D_0_) and the mean absolute
as _M_0_ is known.
discussed in a following chapter.
we get for _D_0_ the value 22, corresponding to a number of 90 stars
 We should then know a


 _Parallax stars.
catalogues of stars with known annual parallax.
these catalogues is that of WALKEY, containing measured parallaxes of
 For a great many of these stars the value of the parallax
pointed out that only for such stars as have a parallax greater than
04 (or a distance smaller than 5 siriometers) may the measured
 The

catalogue of parallax stars with the help of the ingenious spectroscopic
and therefore also the distance, of even farther stars through an
spectra.
should be,[15] but there is every reason to believe that the course
parallax stars in Contrib.
complete material than the catalogues of directly measured parallaxes.
give here a short resumé of the attributes of the parallax stars in this

The catalogue of ADAMS embraces stars of the spectral types F, G, K and
 In order to complete this material by parallaxes of blue stars I add
the spectral types B and A, confining myself to stars for which the
 There are in all 61 such
discussed.

also the proper motion μ.
compute the mean values and the dispersion of these attributes.
get the following table, in which I confine myself to the mean values of



_MEAN VALUES OF _m_, _M_ AND THE PROPER MOTIONS (μ) OF PARALLAX STARS OF
_
We shall later consider all parallax stars taken together.
table 6 that the apparent magnitude, as well as the absolute magnitude,
stars of type F, the apparent magnitude being approximately equal to +6m
 For type B we find the mean
7 and for type A we find M = +0m.
 The proper
0″.
1.
draw distinct conclusions from this material, because the parallax stars
values, as will be more fully discussed below.
conclusion to be drawn from the parallax stars is obtained from their
 In the memoir referred to,
from the table of ADAMS),[16] which gives the number of parallax stars
types.

pronounced property in these frequency distributions.
that in the types G, K and M the frequency curves are evidently
 In all these types we
 With a
of _giant_ stars, the latter group of _dwarf_ stars.
of type F this division may be suggested.
pronounced in the graphical representation given in figures (plate IV).

In the distribution of all the parallax stars we once more find a
 Arguing from these statistics some
divided into two classes, which are not in reality closely related.
one class consists of intensely luminous stars and the other of feeble
 If the
or even according to their absolute proper motion, a similar bipartition

Nevertheless the bipartition of the stars into two such distinct classes
 Such an _apparent_
individuals are selected from a given population in such a manner as the
 Let us consider
population and suppose that the attribute _C_ is _positively_ correlated
or _B_ correspond respectively great or small values of _C_.
individuals in the population are statistically selected in such a way
and small values of the attribute _B_, then we get a statistical series
normal frequency distributions.
parallax stars are selected.
following.
nearer than, say, 5 siriometers.
is not possible.
the following way.
be relatively brighter than other stars and secondly possess greater
 Therefore parallax observations are
motions.
 But
 By the selection of
regarding the attribute _M_ seem to be divided into two distinct

The distribution of the parallax stars gives us no reason to believe
classes.
of classes of giant and dwarf stars, not any more than a classification
population.
the absolute magnitudes of the parallax stars is only that the
or red stars.
“giants” will probably be performed according as our knowledge of the
parallax but other methods of measuring the distance must be employed.

conclusions of interest.
magnitude of the parallax stars varies between -4 and +11, the extreme
 The absolutely brightest stars have a rather

6, which value
014 found by ADAMS.
value is of little reliability when it is directly computed from annual
spectroscopic method of ADAMS.
_B_-stars, to which we return in a later chapter, that the absolutely
 If the
01 were taken into account we should find that
-8.
97, but both
007, which is
magnitude.

parallax stars give more trustworthy results.
with near stars for which the annual parallax is well determined.
table 8 I give a list of those parallax stars that have an absolute

There are in all 19 such stars.
INNES' star “Proxima Centauri” with _M_ = 13.
 The third star is
7, both being, together with α Centauri,
 The mean distance of all the faint
0 sir.

of the faint stars is found from these faint parallax stars:--Certainly
for all stars in the Galaxy, is probably not far from the absolute value
 This problem will be


 Noble, elevating,

 Dreams of

Beauty.

hour when the crescent moon is shining in the West amid the last glimmer
of the stars stepping forth in sequence in the vast Heavens? All sounds
sunk away, the Angelus of the church hard by has rung the close of day.
But if life is arrested around us, we may seek it in the Heavens.
incandescing orbs are so many points of interrogation suspended above
.
.
multiply.
 There Mars,
 There the giant Jupiter.
The seven stars of the Great Bear seem to point out the pole, while they
.
.
the darkness of the heavens, and traverses the constellations like a
millions of suns!.
.
.
.
See! Yonder a shooting star glides silently across the sky, and
.

Who can remain insensible to this magic spectacle of the starry Heavens?
intelligence of the amateur, the feminine, no less than the more
consideration of astronomical problems.
predisposed to these contemplative studies.
to play in the education of our children is so vast, and so important,
herself to the budding minds that are curious about every issue--whose

Throughout the ages women have occupied themselves successfully with
its mathematical aspects.
beautiful and learned Hypatia of Alexandria, born in the year 375 of our
three works of great importance.
fanaticism, she fell a victim to human stupidity and malice, was dragged
stripped of her garments, stoned to death, and burned as a dishonored


virtue.
312, and has given her name to one of the lunar rings.

born in 1723, who collaborated with Clairaut in the immense calculations
 "Madame Lepaute,"
should never have ventured to undertake this enormous labor, in which it
years, the distances and forces of the planets acting by their
 During more than six months, we calculated from
forced labor I contracted an illness that has changed my constitution
of the comet.

of Madame Lepaute.

 "To her intellectual talents,"
heart.
foot, and such a beautiful hand that Voiriot, the King's painter, who
preserve a model of the best in Nature.
learned women can not be good-looking!.
.

 She was predestined to
 Gabrielle-Émilie de
Châtelet, becoming, in 1733, the most celebrated friend of Voltaire),
as a doll, for a plaything.
the child began angrily and impatiently to strip off the silly draperies
little hands, she divined its uses, and traced a circle with it on a
 To her, among other things, we owe a precious, and
gravitation, the famous Principia, and she was, with Voltaire, an
by the Académie des Sciences.

accessible this highly abstract science is to the feminine intellect.
President des Brosses, in his charming Voyage en Italie, tells of the
harangues in Latin, and was acquainted with seven languages, and for
 She was devoted to algebra and
peace reigns.
the same order: "An hour or two of mathematics sets my mind at liberty,
I have seen obvious and indisputable truths.
obscurities of religion and metaphysics, or rather makes me forget them;
" And did not
died in 1892, exclaim in her turn: "Astronomy, science of sciences! by
detached from the things of this world, for it draws me to those unknown
gloriam Dei!_'"
Nor must we omit Miss Caroline Herschel, sister of the greatest observer
lived.
seven comets herself, and her patient labors preserved her to the age of
--And Mrs.
translation of Laplace's Mécanique céleste, of whom Humboldt said, "In
 Somerville is absolutely superior.
Herschel, she was almost a centenarian, appearing always much younger
ninety-two.
Mathias Corvinus, King of Hungary, who, an accomplished mathematician at
University (then forbidden to unmarried women); arranging with her young
completed.
her.
a _fête_ at the Observatory of Paris, and who was exceptionally
College, at that time an ecclesiastical establishment, closed to
--And Madame Scarpellini, the Roman astronomer, renowned for her
company with Father Secchi, Director of the Observatory mentioned above.

workers Miss Agnes Clerke, the learned Irishwoman, to whom we owe,
Century;--Mrs.
Klumpke, sat on the Council of the Astronomical Society of France, and
 Sc.
star photographs at the Observatory of Paris (an American who became
forgotten in France);--Mrs.
Observatory at Harvard College, U.
A.
a great number of variable stars by the examination of photographic
the learned collaborator of her illustrious husband;--and many others.


Astronomy in twelve lessons for amateurs, will not make astronomers or
 They are
its beauty, so that, inhabiting this world, we may know where we are
it is, and enjoy it to better advantage.
succession of months and years, of days and nights, the apparent motions
whole totality of things, constitutes in some sort the tissue of our
planet should almost all have lived till now without knowing where they

       *       *       *       *       *
For the rest, my little book is dedicated to a woman, muse and
ranking even above her in the choir of celestial beauties, as purer and
universe.
of the ancients have imagined a masculine symbol to personify the
 Not Uranus, nor Saturn, nor Jupiter can compare

Moreover, I have before me two delightful books, in breviary binding,

Entretiens sur la Pluralité des Mondes.
married with science, the author declaring that he only demands from his

 In
two sponsors and esteem myself the better for it.


CHAPTER I
THE CONTEMPLATION OF THE HEAVENS

 The sea has
Heavens in a mirror of turquoise and emerald.
and silver, and break noisily on a shore already darkened by the

We gaze regretfully after the star of day, that poured its cheerful rays
happiness.
dreaming forget the moments that are rapidly flying by.
gradually increases, and twilight gives way to night.

the waves at the far horizon, could hardly be unmoved by the pageant of

The light of the Crescent Moon, like some fairy boat suspended in the
upon the ocean.
western horizon.
whole of the occidental heavens.
rays translucent.

 Here
the Great Bear, a whole sidereal population catching fire, like
 It is a new life that is
regions.

flaming letters on these Constellations the syllables of the great

of our beloved Sun! What wealth, what beauty hast thou not reserved for
pageant and deaf to its language!
To whatever quarter of the Heavens we look, the splendors of the night
 These celestial eyes seem in their
 Thus indeed have they questioned
 Homer
 They shone upon the slow succession
Pyramids, Greece at the time of the Trojan War, Rome and Carthage,
 The
 The Stars

The silence of the vast and starry Heavens may terrify us; its immensity
 But our inquiring thought flies curiously on
 It rests
 It seeks what
is established, and, as it were, protected by all Nature in these silent
 Our sense of solitude has disappeared.
infinitesimal atoms, we form part of that immense universe, and this
 Each
counsellor, for all the thoughts it suggests to us are pure and holy.

tablets of the firmament? Nothing could be more ideal.
poetic sentiment that the beauty of Heaven awakens in our soul ought
 That is no less marvelous than the

And here we may ask ourselves how many there are, even among thinking
men and women are sincerely, and with unfeigned curiosity, interested in
of a better acquaintance with them?
Seek, talk, ask in the intercourse of daily life.
pages, who already love the Heavens, and comprehend them, who desire to
is, and what Heaven--you shall witness that the number of those
disgraceful is it to the so-called intelligence of our race.
the great Book of the Heavens is open to all eyes.
us in the study of the Universe! Nothing could speak more eloquently to

 It is the most beautiful and
times of highest antiquity.
acquainted with the innumerable orbs by which our nights are
what we are.
ignorance of the very conditions of our terrestrial existence.
it we should still be penetrated with the naïve error that reduced the
the Creation, and should have no exact notion of the immense reality.

also to the immortal genius of the men of science who have devoted their
Newton--the veil of ignorance has been rent, and glimpses of the marvels
of the thinker.

in a cerebral torture that obliterates all the beauty, the fascination,
 Figures, and naught but
instruction.
shall decipher the hieroglyphics of algebra and geometry.
thought! For the rest, figures are but the scaffolding, the method, and

[Illustration: FIG.
--The great Book of the Heavens is open to all
]
We simply beg of you to open your eyes, to see where you are, so that
happiness.
to make you persevere.
knowing that you are thinking correctly, and that it is infinitely
 The reality is far beyond all
 The most fairy-like
military reviews, the most sumptuous marvels on which the human race can
nothing compared with the unheard-of wonders scattered through
 There are so many that one does not know how to see them.
The fascinated eye would fain grasp all at once.

sparkling fires of Space, you will never regret the moments passed all

Diamonds, turquoises, rubies, emeralds, all the precious stones with
perfection, more beautiful, and more splendid, set in the immensity of
majestic and powerful suns, from whose attacks there is naught to fear.
And these vagabond comets and shooting stars and stellar nebulæ, do they
with the History of Nature? Soaring toward the Infinite, we purify our
and more intelligent.


oppresses us.

Heaven, we reply, is no vault, it is a limitless immensity,
midst of which our globe is floating.
all that we see, and all that we do not see: the Earth on which we are,
and sheds her soft beams upon our silent nights; the good Sun to which
whole of Creation.

Sun, shining above our heads, and fertilizing our seasons, is as much a
far distance, and embellish the calm of our nights with their
 All are in the Heavens, you as well as I, for the Earth, in
Infinitude.

" These words do not
surface of this planet only.
Earth, "low" is the inside, the center of the globe, and "high" is what
 The Heavens are what surround

The Earth is, like her fellows, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn,

The Sun, her father, protects her, and directs all her actions.
the grateful daughter, obeys him blindly.
over the celestial ocean.

navigation?
On nothing.
relatively light weight, isolated on all sides in Space, like a

Above, below, on all sides, millions of similar globes are grouped into
and distant stars that people Infinitude; suns more or less analogous to
although our Sun is a million times larger than our planet.

motions that incessantly alter its position were recognized, the Earth
 The sky was
 The ancients supplied our world with
 They could
idea of its weight.
is based on nothing.
all directions give definite proof of this.


 For the rest the Earth
 Night is only a partial
not exist under conditions other than that of the absolute isolation of

[Illustration: FIG.
--The earth in space.
]
Since the Sun can only illuminate one side of our globe at one moment,
state of the part that is not illuminated.
itself, all the parts successively exposed to the Sun are in the day,
produced by the Earth itself, are in night.
midnight, the stars always occupy the same position in the Heavens,
longer see them; and when we are plunged into the darkness of the night,
countries turned toward him.

speaking, to the Earth, in which the rest of the Universe does not
 The same occurs for every world that is illuminated by a
 In absolute space, there is no

Upheld in space by forces that will be explained at a later point, our

Imagine a magnificent aerostat, lightly and rapidly cleaving space.
Surround it with eight little balloons of different sizes, the smallest
such as are distributed for a bonus in large stores.
sailing through the air, and you have the system of our worlds in

Still, this is only an image, a comparison.
the atmosphere, in which they float at equilibrium.
sustained by nothing material.
ethereal void; an immaterial force; gravitation.
and if she did not revolve, she would drop into him; but rotating round
she produces a centrifugal force, like that of a stone in a sling, that
the central orb, and these two equilibrated forces keep her at the same

This solar and planetary group does not exist solitary in the immense
 As we said above, each star
eyes and thoughts during the charmed hours of the night, is another sun
such as are multiplied through all space to infinity.
the immense distances between the sun-stars, Space is so vast, and the
the distance, appearances would lead us to believe that the stars were
 And under certain telescopic aspects, and in some of the

The Universe is infinite.
 If our love for the
of undertaking a journey directed to the ends of Heaven as its goal, we
see the grandiose and phenomenal spectacle of a new Universe unfold
archipelago of worlds to seek the barriers of Heaven beyond them, we

 Everywhere, on all

According to all the probabilities, universal life is distributed there
distant worlds that we divine in the vicinity of the innumerable suns
Life is the goal of Nature.
warmth and light, these various, multi-colored suns shed their rays upon

Our globe is no exception in the Universe.
the celestial orbs, nourished, warmed, lighted, quickened by the Sun,

Innumerable Worlds! We dream of them.
inhabitants do not think of us in their turn, and that Space may not be
universal gravitation? May not an immense solidarity, hardly guessed at
Earth being only a modest planet.

employing the best of our hours, those of the silence and peace of the
the Great Book of the Heavens.
toward those marvelous countries where indescribable joys are prepared
sciences, to Astronomy, which diffuses the light of Truth within us.

to higher regions than it attains in any other meditation.
remember the beautiful lines of Victor Hugo in the Orientales? Who has
fitting title.
seems to complete their pure beauty:
          J'étais seul près des flots par une nuit d'étoiles.
          Pas un nuage aux cieux, sur les mers pas de voiles;
          Et les bois et les monts et toute la nature
              Les flots des mers, les feux du ciel.

          A voix haute, à voix basse, avec mille harmonies
          Et les flots bleus, que rien ne gouverne et n'arrête,
              .
.


          Not a cloud in the sky, not a sail in sight,
.

          Seemed to question in a confused murmur,

          And the golden stars in infinite legion,
          Inclining their crowns of fire;.
.
          And the waves that naught can check nor arrest
.


 The author more than
sky--and reflected that astronomers might well be poets.

abysses of infinite Space, when we behold the innumerable multitude of
 We feel in this solitary contemplation
visible matter: that there are forces, laws, destinies.
may know themselves microscopic, and yet recognize that there is
Visible, the Invisible;--beyond the more or less vulgar affairs of life,
 We feel that an immense
 And it is
becomes our sovereign teacher, that it is the _pharos_ of modern

O Night, mysterious, sublime, and infinite! withdrawing from our eyes
to the Heavens, showing us the prodigious reality, the shining casket of
interminably in immeasurable space! Without Night we should know
 Without it our eyes would never have divined the sidereal
Heavens, and we should have remained the blind, deaf parasites of a
 O Sacred Night! If on the
on the other its invisible urns pour down a silent and tranquil peace, a
 It makes us
toil and noisy activity, all the conventionalities of civilization.
domain is that of rest and dreams.
tranquillity.
 We love it because it
the presage of Life, Universal and Eternal, because it brings us Hope,





In Chapter I we saw the Earth hanging in space, like a globe isolated on

These fiery orbs are suns like that which illuminates ourselves.
shine by their own light.
far off that they could neither be illuminated by the Sun, nor, still
have been able to measure and analyze their light.
suns are simple and isolated; others are double, triple, or multiple;
gravitates round our own Sun, and of which we form part.
celestial tribes are situated at such remote distances from us that it
family.

sun-stars,--prodigious globes, flaming torches, scattered profusely

How, then, is one to distinguish them? How can they be readily found and

 In studying the surface of the
of which it consists are drawn with the utmost care.
planet is subdivided into states, each of which has its proper name.
shall pursue the same plan in regard to the Heavens, and it will be all
our gaze.
read the whole in due sequence.
stimulus to the will from our love of truth and science, and the
us as the geography of our terrestrial atom.

are at first aware only of a number of shining specks.
be scattered almost accidentally through Space; they are so numerous and
them separately.
excite our attention.
regularity in the arrangement of these distant suns, and take pleasure

That is what the ancients did from a practical point of view.
to guide themselves across the trackless ocean, the earliest Phenician
out their routes.
immovable Pole, and acquired empire over the sea.
too, the nomad people of the East, invoked the Heavens to assist in
 They grouped the more brilliant of the stars into
provinces a name derived from mythology, history, or from the natural
 It is impossible to determine the exact epoch of this
 The Centaur Chiron, Jason's tutor, was
Argonauts.
the Prophet Job, who names Orion, the Pleiades, and the Hyades, 3,300
 The Babylonian Tables, and the hieroglyphs of Egypt, witness
epochs.
origin, appear to have been arranged in their present form by the
C.
sang of them in a didactic poem toward 270.
first to note the astronomical positions with any precision, one hundred
 He classified the stars in order of
preserved in the Almagest of Ptolemy, contains 1,122 stars distributed

The figures of the constellations, taken almost entirely from fable, are
placed such and such a person or animal, we may see, with a little
 There is nothing real about
 And yet it is indispensable to be able to recognize the
the stars, and we shall commence this study with the description of the
night through our Northern Heavens.
to every one.

Chariot of David, the Plow or Charles's Wain, and the Dipper, is one of
that the Chinese hailed it as the divinity of the North, over three

If any of my readers should happen to forget its position in the sky,
 Turn to the
midday.
the night, you will always see, high up in the firmament, seven
handle, of three stars.
our horizon.
hours round a very famous star that we shall shortly become acquainted
 In the figure of the Great Bear, the four stars of the
the tail.
the three others the horses.

celestial pastures," from which the word septentrion (_septem triones_,
 Some see a Plowshare; others more
 As it rotates round the pole,

It is not easy to guess why this constellation should have been called
 Yet the name has had a certain influence.
_arctos_ (bear) has come arctic, and for its antithesis, antarctic.
the Latin word _trio_ (ox of labor) has come septentrion, the seven
 Etymology is not always logical.
derived from Venus?
In order to distinguish one star from another, the convention of
it would be impossible to give a name to each, so considerable is their
[3]
[alpha] and [beta] denote the front wheels of the Chariot generally
[zeta], [eta] the three horses.
of magnitude (the specific meaning of this expression will be explained
which is of the third order.

 3.
]
Figure 3 gives the outline of this primitive constellation.
in twenty-four hours round the Pole, which is situated at the
conceivable position,--as if this page were turned in all directions.
But the relative arrangement of the seven stars remains unaltered.
contemplating these seven stars it must never be forgotten that each is
 One of them is especially
 Those who have good
also called Saidak by the Arabs--that is, the Test, because it can be
 But further, if you have a small telescope at
astonished at discovering two of the finest diamonds you could wish to
 There are several double

Meantime, we must not forget our celestial geography.
will help us to find all the adjacent constellations.

 4.
]
If a straight line is drawn (Fig.
forms the extremity of the square, and is prolonged by a quantity equal
of second magnitude, which marks the extremity of a figure perfectly
pointing in the contrary direction.
like its big brother, of seven stars; the one situated at the end of the

Immovable in the region of the North Pole, the Pole-Star has captivated
 It is the providence of
North, while it is the pivot of the immense rotation accomplished round
 Hence it is a very important
 It
Earth's axis, is merely an effect caused by the diurnal movements of our
 Our readers are of course aware that it is the earth that turns
 But evidence of this will be given later on.
at the Pole-Star, the South is behind one, the East to the right, and

Between the Great and the Little Bear, we can distinguish a winding
 These constitute the Dragon.

placed on the opposite side of the Pole-Star in relation to the Great
 It is
 And, in fact, when the figure is represented with
and [gamma] [delta] [epsilon] its back.

prolonged beyond the Pole-Star in a quantity equal to the distance which

 This group, like the preceding, never sets, and is always visible,
 It revolves in twenty-four hours round the
now to the left.

 5.
]
[Illustration: FIG.
--To Find Pegasus and Andromeda.

Great Bear, we draw two lines which join at Polaris and are prolonged
 6), a vast
three stars.

Perseus.
Andromeda.

return in the next chapter, _i.
_, the telescope resolves it into two
emerald-green.
instruments.

 7.
]
Above [beta] and near a small star, is visible a faint, whitish,
mentioned in the history of astronomy, and one of the most beautiful in

The stars [alpha], [beta] and [gamma] of Perseus form a concave bow
 If it is prolonged in the
magnitude.
Charioteer (Fig.

If coming back to [delta] in Perseus, a line is drawn toward the South,
the finest dust of diamonds, on the shoulder of the Bull, to which we

Not far off is a very curious star, [beta] of Perseus, or Algol, which
 This star
intensity, and is sometimes pale, sometimes brilliant.
category of variable stars which we shall study later on.
observations made on it for more than two hundred years go to prove that
sight, producing as it passes in front of it a partial eclipse that
days, twenty hours, and forty-nine minutes.

to start for these distant shores, and whence we shall set out afresh in

If we produce the curved line of the tail, or handle, we encounter a
let us make our bow to Arcturus, [alpha] of the Herdsman, which is at
 The principal stars of
which is of the first.
of five stars of the third and fourth magnitude, save the third,
 This is the
 It is very easily recognized (Fig.

[Illustration: FIG.
--To find Arcturus, the Herdsman, and the Northern
]
A line drawn from the Pole-Star to Arcturus forms the base of an
Bear, is occupied by Vega, or [alpha] of the Lyre, a splendid diamond of
 This magnificent star, of
 It
from a constellation that is very easily recognized by the arrangement
 It is named Cygnus, the
 9), and is easy to find by the Square of
 This figure, the brilliancy of whose
with the pallor of the Milky Way, includes at its extremity at the foot
is also called Deneb.
calculated is in this constellation.
which hangs 69,000,000,000,000 kilometers (42,000,000,000,000 miles)

[Illustration: FIG.
--The Swan, Vega, the Eagle.

and in which the star Altaïr, [alpha], of first magnitude, is situated

The Constellation of Hercules, toward which the motions of the Sun are
 Its
Pole-Star, Arcturus, and Vega.

Hemisphere.
 They revolve

Having now learned the Northern Heavens, we must come back to the Sun,
 The Earth revolves round him in a year,
circle of the celestial sphere.
passes the same points of the Heavens, in front of the same
 We know that
distance, and that if we do not see them at noon as at midnight, it is
day.
brilliant of them.

year.
"animal," and this etymology arose because most of the figures traced
 The belt is divided into twelve
ancients the "Houses of the Sun," since the Sun visits one of them in
 These are the signs, with the primitive characters that
[Gemini], the Crab [Cancer], the Lion [Leo], the Virgin [Virgo], the
Goat [Capricorn], the Water-Carrier [Aquarius], the Fishes [Pisces].
sign [Aries] represents the horns of the Ram, [Taurus] the head of the

If you will now follow me into the Houses of the Sun you will readily
stars of the Northern Heavens.
of the Zodiac; because at the epoch at which the actual Zodiac was
crossed the ecliptic at this point.
horns of the Ram (third magnitude) are the brightest, is situated
 Two thousand years ago, the Ram was
the precession of the equinoxes, the Sun is no longer there on March 21:

To the left, or east of the Ram, we find the Bull, the head of which
magnificent red star that marks the right eye; and the Hyades,
 The timid Pleiades,
captivating cluster, of which six stars can be counted with the unaided

Next the Twins.
[alpha] and [beta], of first magnitude, which mark their heads, and
indissoluble friendship.

 It is
situated below the line of Castor and Pollux, and by a pale cluster

The Lion next approaches, superb in his majesty.
gorgeous star of first magnitude, [alpha] or Regulus.
a grand trapezium of four stars on the celestial sphere.

which with Regulus and Arcturus, form a triangle by which this

The Balance follows the Virgin.
second magnitude, are situated a little to the East of Spica.

the most beautiful of this belt of stars.
magnitude, occupies the heart of the venomous and accursed Scorpion.
is situated on the prolongation of a line joining Regulus to Spica, and
isosceles triangle, of which this latter star is the apex.

Archer, which follows it, and traces an oblique trapezium in the sky, a
 These two southernmost constellations
 In fable, the

Capricorn lies to the south of Altaïr, on the prolongation of a line
 It is hardly noticeable save for the stars
forehead.

 He is not rich
flattened triangle.

south of Andromeda and Pegasus.
this constellation consists of small stars that are hardly visible.

chart (Figs.

We must now visit the stars of the Southern Heavens, some of which are

[Illustration: FIG.
--The Constellations of the Zodiac: summer and
]
It should in the first place be noted that the signs of the Zodiac and
perpetually visible at all periods of the year.
on the time of year and the hour of the night.

above, we have only to open our windows on a clear summer's evening, or
suns, while we look up at the immense fields in which each star is like

But the summer is over, autumn is upon us, and then, too soon, comes
 The days are short and cold, dark and
herself with her most beautiful jewels, offering us the contemplation of

[Illustration: FIG.
--The Constellations of the Zodiac: winter and
]
First, let us do homage to the magnificent Orion, most splendid of all
Bull.

south-eastern Heavens; toward eleven o'clock in December and January,
March, and about eight in April, in the west; and then sets below our

[Illustration: FIG.
--Orion and his celestial companions.

Great Bear, the most ancient in history, the first that was noticed:

Eight principal stars delineate its outline; two are of the first
 12).
brilliant are Betelgeuse ([alpha]) and Rigel ([beta]): the former
the left foot.
second magnitude; that of the right foot, [chi], is almost of the third.
Three stars of second magnitude placed obliquely at equal distances from
equatorial line, indicate the Belt or Girdle.
Three Kings, and by country people as the Rake, assist greatly in the

A little below the second star of the Belt, a large white patch, like a
lunar disk, is visible to the unaided eye: this is the Nebula of Orion,
 It was discovered in
 Since that
admirers, while the giant eye of the telescope discovers in it to-day an
entire universe in this region.

also the richest in sidereal wonders.
complex of all the multiple systems known to us: that of the star
 This marvelous
forming a most remarkable stellar group.

firmament.
in the sky, the magnificent Sirius, which shines on the left below
 This marvelous
constellation of the Great Dog, which forms a quadrilateral, the base of

When astronomers first endeavored to determine the distance of the
particular object of attention.
in determining its distance as 92 trillion kilometers (57 trillion
 Light, that radiates through space at a velocity of 300,000
reach us from this sun, which, nevertheless, is one of our neighbors.

out, is above its big brother.
bright stars.

 13.
]
Lastly, toward the southern horizon, we must notice the Hydra, Eridanus,
 This last
is nearest to the Earth, [alpha], of first magnitude, the distance of

[Illustration: FIG.
--Spring Constellations.

invisible to us, and a little farther down the Southern Pole reigns

[Illustration: FIG.
--Summer Constellations.

 16.
]
In order to complete the preceding descriptions, we subjoin four charts
winter, spring, summer, and autumn.
suppose them to be placed above our heads, the center marking the
 The horizon,
 Turning the chart in any direction,
principal stars.
 13) represents the sky in winter
M.
M.
in summer (July) at the same hour; the fourth, the sky in autumn

And so, at little cost, we have made one of the grandest and most
 We now have a new country, or, better,
planet we must all be citizens of the Heavens before we can belong to

We must now study this sublime spectacle of the Heavens in detail.


CHAPTER III
THE STARS, SUNS OF THE INFINITE
A JOURNEY THROUGH SPACE

that there is great diversity in the brightness of the stars, and that
on the contrary, sparkle modestly in the azure depths of the night, and
Immensity.

the reader might imagine this to bear some relation to the volume of the
 But this is not the case.

been classified in order of magnitude, according to their apparent
wholly unknown to us, the most luminous stars were naturally denoted as
and so on.
it bears no relation to the mass of the stars, divided thus at an epoch
 It
depending on its dimensions, its intrinsic light, and its distance from

And now to make some comparison between the different orders.
the entire firmament, only nineteen stars of first magnitude are
 And, strictly speaking, the last of this series might just
series might be added to the list of stars of the "first order.
order to form classes distinct from one another, some limit has to be
the following stars, the most luminous in the Heavens, which are



 Sirius, or [alpha] of the Great Dog.
           2.

 Capella, or [alpha] of the Charioteer.
           4.

 Vega, or [alpha] of the Lyre.
           6.

 Rigel, or [beta] of Orion.
           8.

 Procyon, or [alpha] of the Little Dog.
          10.

 Betelgeuse, or [alpha] of Orion.
          12.

 [alpha] of the Southern Cross.
          14.

 Spica, or [alpha] of the Virgin.
          16.

 Pollux, or [beta] of the Twins.
          18.

 Fomalhaut, or [alpha] of the Southern Fish.

THE STARS OF THE SECOND MAGNITUDE
Then come the stars of the second magnitude, of which there are
 The stars of the Great Bear (with the exception of [delta],
(after Rigel and Betelgeuse), of the Lion, of Pegasus, of Andromeda, of
 These, with the former, constitute the

Then follow the third and fourth magnitudes, and so on.


magnitude, which is the limit of visibility for the unaided human eye:
             19 stars of first magnitude.
             59 of second magnitude.
            182 of third magnitude.
            530 of fourth magnitude.
          1,600 of fifth magnitude.
          4,800 of sixth magnitude.

eye.
as populated as that preceding it; consequently, if we multiply the
that make up the class succeeding it.

all these lucid points are suns, as enormous as they are potent, as
than a million times), distant centers of light and heat, exerting their
 And yet it is generally imagined that
 This is an illusion;
magnitude, and ordinary sight is far from discovering all of these.

thousand five hundred for half the sky.
celestial hemisphere at a time.
of the atmosphere veils the little stars of sixth magnitude.
we never see at a given moment more than three thousand stars.
number is below that of the population of a small town.


seven thousand stars that fascinate our eyes and enrich our Heavens,
the whole of Creation.

Where our vision is arrested, a larger, more powerful eye, that is
abysses, and reflects back to the insatiable curiosity of science the
 This eye is the lens of
 Even opera-glasses disclose stars of the
 A small astronomical objective penetrates to the
 More powerful instruments attain the tenth.
The Heavens are progressively transformed to the eye of the astronomer,
night.
developed; and the stars of the eleventh and twelfth magnitudes are
 Then follow
 This is the










Accordingly, the most powerful telescopes of the day, reenforced by
stars into the scope of our vision.

first fourteen magnitudes, and will give the precise position of some
meters 44 centimeters in diameter.

picture such millions of suns--formidable and burning globes that roll
 What furnaces are

their free revolution in the ether! In what abysses, at what a distance
pursue the paths traced for them by Destiny!
       *       *       *       *       *
If all the stars radiated an equal light, their distances might be
to its distance.
 The suns were not all

Indeed, the stars differ widely in size and brightness, and the
the nearest.

Among the nearer stars of which it has been found possible to calculate
eighth, and even ninth magnitudes, proving that the most brilliant are

For the rest, among the beautiful and shining stars with which we made
distance of 92 trillion kilometers (57 trillion miles) from here still
as remote as 112 trillion kilometers (69-1/2 trillion miles); Altaïr of
Vega, at 204 trillion kilometers (126-1/2 trillion miles); Capella, at
trillion kilometers (213-1/2 trillion miles).
through Space at a velocity of 300,000 kilometers (186,000 miles) per
sun: _i.
_, the luminous ray we are now receiving from Polaris has been
 When you, gentle reader,
speeding on its way.
traveled 300,000 kilometers; in the second it added another 300,000
for the third second, and so on during the thirty-six years and a half.

accomplished in one second) in superposed rows, as if for an addition
separates the Pole-Star from our Earth, the necessary operation would
setting out of such a sum would measure approximately 11,510 kilometers
e.
globe, or about four times the distance from Paris to Moscow!
Is it not impossible to realize that our Sun, with its entire system, is
distance of the least remote of the stars he would appear as one of the

       *       *       *       *       *
The nearest star to us is [alpha] of the Centaur, of first magnitude, a
 Its distance is
e.
million kilometers, which gives 41 trillions, or 41,000 milliards of
 [A milliard = 1,000 millions, the
 A trillion = 1,000 milliards, or a million millions, the
 The _French_ nomenclature has been retained by the
] At a speed of 300,000 kilometers (186,000 miles) per second
 It is a fine double

The next nearest star after this is a little orb invisible to the
 It has no name, and stands as No.
of Lalande.
8).
is 64 trillion kilometers (39-1/2 trillion miles).

Cygnus, already referred to in Chapter II, in describing the
 Its distance is 69 trillion kilometers (42-1/2 trillion
 This, too, is a double star.
reach us.

Vega, and Capella are more remote.


in space at 4 milliards, 470 million kilometers (2,771,400,000 miles)
 Even this is a respectable distance! But beyond this
star, [alpha] of the Centaur.
star to cheer the black and cold solitude of the immense vacuum.
two unknown planets, some wandering comets, and swarms of meteors,

Later on we will discuss the methods that have been employed in
 Let us now continue our description.


approach them with the telescope, and compare them one with another.

that is several times heavier than our own, and of much greater mass,
 Its
like Vega and Altaïr.

with golden rays, like our Sun, and the vapor of iron, of sodium, and of
 These stars are
[alpha] of Hercules, are still older; several of them are variable, and

The Heavens afford us a perennial store of treasure, wherein the
contemplation.

sapphires, topazes, and other precious stones of the sidereal casket.
These marvels are met with especially among the double stars.

its brothers in Infinitude.
are suns!
Stars, you will think, are like individuals: each has its distinct
 And indeed this reflection is
 While human vanity does homage to Phoebus, divine King of
or three splendid orbs, which roll the prodigious combinations of their
worlds that accompany them a flood of changing light, now blue, now red,

In the inexhaustible variety of Creation there exist Suns that are
attraction, and often colored in the most delicate and entrancing shades
 Here will be a dazzling ruby, its glowing color shedding
emeralds, hue of hope.
sparkle from the abyss, and shed their penetrating light into the vast
 What splendors are scattered broadcast over the sky! what

points of greater or less brilliancy; but the telescope soon discovers
suns, in close proximity.
merely due to an effect of perspective--_i.
_, the presence of two or
systems, and these suns, associated in a common lot, rotate round one

One of the most splendid of these _double stars_, and at the same time
mentioned above in describing this constellation.
colors, but exactly resembles twin diamonds of the finest water, which

Its components are of the second and fourth magnitudes, their distance =
 Some idea of their appearance in a small telescope may be
 17).

 Magnitudes second and third.
Distance 5.
 Very easy to observe.
into two splendid diamonds of third magnitude.
0".
double star is [gamma] of the Ram, of fourth magnitude.
9".

 17.
]
And here are two that are even more curious by reason of their coloring:
emerald-green, which again is accompanied by a tiny comrade of the
 This group in a good telescope is most attractive.
Magnitudes, second and fifth.

[beta] of the Swan, or Albireo, referred to in the last chapter, has

 Distance, 34".
known also as the Heart of Charles II, is golden-yellow and lilac.
Magnitudes, third and fifth.
[7]
[alpha] of Hercules revolves a splendid emerald and a ruby in the skies;
electric sun, and a small sapphire; Antares is ruddy and emerald-green;
is deep blue, and so on.


around one another, as in some majestic valse, marrying their

Here, we constantly receive a pure and dazzling white light from our
 Its ray, indeed, contains the potentiality of every
that gravitate round these multiple and colored suns as they shed floods
spectacle must life present upon these distant universes!
Let us suppose that we inhabit a planet illuminated by two suns, one

It is morning.
the atmosphere with a somber and almost melancholy hue.
attains the zenith, and is beginning its descent toward the West, when
ascends the heights of the firmament.
penumbra of the rays of the blue sun, while the East is illuminated with

The first sun is setting when the second noon shines for the inhabitants
 But the red sun, too, accomplishes the law of its
 Hardly has it disappeared in the conflagration of its last
opposite side, shedding a pale azure light upon the world it
 And thus these two suns fraternize in
extra-terrestrial light for the globes that are subject to their

Scarlet, indigo, green, and golden suns; pearly and multi-colored Moons;
here below to see and know but one white Sun?
As we have learned, there are not only double, but triple, and also
 One of the finest ternary systems is that of [gamma] in
 Its large star is orange, its second green,
powerful telescope is needed to separate them.
to observe is [zeta] of Cancer, composed of three orbs of fifth
common center of gravity in fifty-nine years, the third takes over three
 The preceding figure shows this system in a fairly
 18).

 18.
]
In the Lyre, a little above the dazzling Vega, [epsilon] is of fourth
even be analyzed into two contiguous stars by very sharp sight.
examining this attractive pair with a small glass, it is further obvious
quadruple system of two couples (Fig.
sixth magnitudes, at a distance of 2.
seventh, 3.
 The distance between the two pairs is 207".

 19.
]
In speaking of Orion, we referred to the marvelous star [theta] situated
dazzling sextuple system, in the very heart of the nebula (Fig.
 How

impel them in every direction.

 20.
]
There are no fixed stars.
suns--enormous globes, blazing centers of light and heat--are flying at
day, crossing century by century such vast spaces as are inconceivable

If the stars appear motionless to us, it is because they are so remote,
imperceptible displacements.
commotion in the abysses of the Heavens, which they quicken with an

These perpetual and cumulative motions must eventually modify the aspect
slowly; and for thousands and thousands of years longer the heroes and
and reign undisturbed beneath the starry vault.

plunging with all his system (the Earth included) toward the
 We are changing our position every moment: in
at present.
they have just left, and which they have deserted forever.


type of all the stars.
periodically, in regular cycles--or irregularly.

to its partial eclipse by a dark globe gravitating in the line of our
 There are several others of the same type: these are not,
 But there are many others the

In order to realize this, let us imagine that our Earth belongs to such
Whale, indicated by the letter [omicron], which has been named the
 Our new sun is shining to-day with a dazzling
hearts.
illuminated with its radiance.
diminishes in intensity, though the sky remains clear.
our fine sun darkens; the atmosphere becomes sad and dull, there is an
 For five long months our world is
woe.

luminary revives.
 Its
recovered its former splendors, and showers its bright beams upon our
 But--we must not rejoice too quickly! This
 The flaming star will pale once more;
 Such is the nature of
 It varies in three hundred and thirty-one days, and
 This star, Mira
second to the ninth magnitudes: we cite it as one example; hundreds of

Thus the sky is no black curtain dotted with brilliant points, no empty
 It is a prodigious theater on which the
 Only--there are no

Again, we must note the _temporary stars_, which shine for a certain
 Such was the star in Cassiopeia, in
daylight, burning for five months with unparalleled splendor, dominating
disappearing at the end of seventeen months, to the terror of the
in the Constellation of the Serpent, which shone for a year; of 1866, of
only; of 1876, in the Swan; of 1885, in the Nebula of Andromeda; of

These temporary stars, which appear spontaneously to the observers on
conflagrations, or celestial cataclysms.
the epoch at which the phenomena occurred, years upon years, and
 For instance, the conflagration photographed by the
Elizabeth.

       *       *       *       *       *
The Heavens are full of surprises, on which we can bestow but a fleeting
 They present a field of infinite variety.

entire firmament and is so luminous on clear evenings in the

curiously enough, they are perfectly visible.
divine the starry constitution: a small telescope shows us marvels.
Eighteen millions of stars were counted there with the gauges of William

Now this Milky Way is a symbol, not of the Universe, but of the

Our Sun is a star of the Milky Way.
and if the Earth were transparent, we should see it pass beneath our
 It consists of a very considerable mass
in front of others, while the whole forms an agglomeration.

 21.
]
Among this mass of star-groups, several thousands of which are already
Hercules, which can be distinguished with the unaided eye, between the
 Many photographs of it
thousands of stars; and one of these is reproduced in the accompanying
 21).

 22.
]
Another of the most beautiful, on account of its regularity, is that of
 22).

telescope, such as crowns, fishes, crabs, open mouths, birds with

We must also note the _gaseous nebulæ_, universes in the making,
g.
while ago in connection with its sextuple star: and also that in
 23).

 23.
]
[Illustration: FIG.
--Nebula in the Greyhounds.

evolves in gigantic spirals round a dazzling focus, and then loses
 Fig.

[Illustration: FIG.
--The Pleiades.

readers can get some notion of these star-clusters with the help of a
looking at the beautiful group of the Pleiades, already familiar to us
 The little map
 25) will be an assistance in recognizing them, and in

0.
          Electra    4.

6.
          Maia       5.

5.
          Taygeta    5.

3.
          Celæno     6.

8.

others.

brilliancy, and the poets related that the seventh star had fled at the
 Ovid adds that she was mortified at not being
 It is probable that only the
 The

The length of this republic, from Atlas and Pleione to Celæno, is 4'/23"
36'.

breadth from Merope to Maia 25'.
Moon were placed in front of this group of nine stars, she would cover
Pleiades together.
 She only measures 31', less than
distance from Alcyone to Atlas, and could pass between Merope and
 This is a perennial and
 When the Moon passes in front of the
eyes.
g.
occultation observed at the author's laboratory of Juvisy (Fig.

[Illustration: FIG.
--Occultation of the Pleiades by the Moon.

hundreds and millions.


[Illustration: FIG.
--Stellar dial of the double star [gamma] of the
]
We, alas, can but glance at them rapidly.
transported into immensities both of space and time, for the stellar
magnitude the rapid years in which our terrestrial days are estimated.
For instance, one of the double stars we spoke of above, [gamma] of the
their common center of gravity, in one hundred and eighty years.
many events took place in France, let us say, in a single year of this
XVIII, Louis Philippe, the Second Republic, Napoleon III, the
.
.
a single year of this radiant pair! (Fig.
)
But the pageant of the Heavens is too vast, too overwhelming.
end our survey.

portion of the Creation.
peopled by other universes as vast, as imposing, as our own, which are
distance.
to fold our wings, and return from the Immense and Infinite to our





In the incessant agitation of daily life in which we are involved by the
assume that existence is complete only when it reckons to the good an
last.
must agitate, and be infatuated for inanities, must create imaginary

The thoughtful mind, prone to contemplation and admiration of the
swallows everything--satisfaction, in a life that one has not time to
whirlpool that perpetually hides Truth from us, forgotten forever at the

And why are our lives thus absorbed in merely material interests? To
the Moon were inhabited, and if her denizens could see us plainly
of our planet, it would be curious and perhaps a little humiliating for
 What! we should say, is this the sum of our
futile to give ourselves such trouble.

does not think of it just because it is too easy, although it has the
toward the inexpressible happiness that must always awaken in us with
look out.
one's self be blinded by the illusion and false glamor of appearances.

participation in the harmonious Choir of Nature, to raise one's eyes
Universe! But, no: there is no time, no time for the intellectual life,

Among the objects marshaled for us in the immense spectacle of Nature,
man as much as the Sun, the God of Light, the fecundating orb, without
_the visible image of the invisible god_, as said Cicero, and the poets
 And yet how many beyond the circle of those likely to read
every star is a sun? How many take any account of the reality and
people who have any notion, however rudimentary, of its construction, is
 Humanity is content to vegetate, much after the

Henceforward, you will know that you are living in the rays of a star,
 To the inhabitants of other
luminous point, according as the spot from which it is observed is
 But to us its "terrestrial" importance renders it
and even the most ignorant hail it with enthusiasm without exactly
that they depend on it, and that without it life would become extinct on
 Yes, it is the beneficent rays of the Sun that shed upon
and its perpetual propagation.

portentous luminary.
when we owe him the glow of the warm and cheery days of summer, the
them with the touch? The Sun sustains our globe in Space, and keeps it
attraction.
the flowers that uplift their gracious heads toward his light, and
 It is the Sun that sparkles in the
spring, when the home of the human race is adorned with all the charms
 Everywhere we find the Sun; everywhere
infinitely little.
 When in
fiery globe will never rise to mitigate the short December days which

April restores him to superb majesty, and our hearts are filled with

       *       *       *       *       *
Our celestial journey carried us far indeed from our own Solar System.
Guided by the penetrating eye of the telescope, we reached such distant

But we remember that he burns yonder, in the midst of the pale cosmic
 Let us approach him, now that we have
vast plains strewn with the burning gold of the Suns of the Infinite.

Universe.
depths of Space, and recognize it as our own celestial quarters.
little star shines like the head of a gold pin, and increases in size as
 We traverse a few more trillion miles in our rapid
 It
 Soon we divine that it is our humble Earth that
 In future we shall not
relations with this solar family, which interests us the more in that it

[Illustration: FIG.
--Comparative sizes of the Sun and Earth.

it is fiery red in the evening, at its setting, is an immense globe,
all conceivable proportion.

is to say, if our planet be represented by a globe 1 meter in diameter,
 This is shown on
 28), which is in exact proportion.

its wealth, its mountains, its seas, its monuments, and its inhabitants,
 It would occupy less space in
 If the Earth were placed in
proper distance of 384,000 kilometers (238,500 miles), only half the

In volume the Sun is 1,280,000 times vaster than our abode, and 324,000
 That the giant only appears to us as a small
 Its

When observed with astronomical instruments, or photographed, we
granulated, presenting a number of luminous points dispersed over a
 These granulations are somewhat like the pores
g.
the Sun when it sinks in the evening, and prepares to plunge us into
 At times these pores open under the influence of disturbances
 For
of these spots, regarding them as so many blemishes upon the King of the
 Was not the Sun the emblem of inviolable purity? To find any
 Since the orb of day was
fools and idiots.
solar spots with the telescope, published the result of his experiments

Yet, from the observations of Galileo and other astronomers, it became
it is by these very spots that we are enabled to study the physical

They are generally rounded or oval in shape, and exhibit two distinct
_nucleus_, or _umbra_; second, a clearer region, half shaded, which has
 These parts are sharply defined in
the dazzling brilliancy of the solar surface; but as a matter of fact it
moon.

 29.
]
Some idea of the aspect of these spots may be obtained from the
1898, at the author's observatory at Juvisy), and from the detailed
crossed by a bridge, and furrowed with flames.
undergo rapid transformations.

 30.
]
These spots, which appear of insignificant dimensions to the observers
 Some that have been
e.
kilometers (74,500 miles).

eye (protected with black or dark-blue glasses).
instantaneously, but are heralded by a vast commotion on the solar
 Out of this
progressively to reach a maximum, after which it diminishes, with
 Some are visible only for a few
 Some appear, only to be instantly
 Sometimes, again,
across the central umbra.

the Earth, which, as we have seen, is 108 times smaller than that of the

       *       *       *       *       *
The Sun-Spots are not devoid of motion, and from their movements we
days.
observing the spots, saw that they traversed the solar disk from east
and that they disappear at the western border fourteen days after their
 Sometimes the same spot, after being
was observed twenty-eight days previously.
center of the Sun, which is reached in seven days, disappears anew in
reappear under observation two weeks later, if it has not meantime been
 This observation proves that the Sun revolves upon itself.
The reappearance of the spots occurs in about twenty-seven days, because
focus, a motion effected in the same direction as the solar rotation,
from the point at which they had been twenty-five days previously.
reality, the rotation of the Sun occupies twenty-five and a half days,
like the Earth; the rotation periods, or movements of the different
poles.
twenty-fourth degree of latitude, north or south, twenty-seven at the
 The spots are
between the tenth and thirtieth degrees.
the poles.

luminous regions, which generally surround the spots, and have been
 These faculæ, which
formidable commotions that incessantly revolutionize the face of our
 They can be detected

Our Sun, that appears so calm and majestic, is in reality the seat of
 Volcanic eruptions, the most appalling storms,
zephyrs compared with the solar tempests that engender clouds of fire
planet.

the modest night-light that consumes a midge with the flames of the fire

The solar spots vary in a fairly regular period of eleven to twelve
 In certain years, _e.
_, 1893, they are vast, numerous and
g.

 Here, for instance, is the
visible solar surface:
          1889            78
          1891           569
          1893         1,464
          1896           543
          1898           375
          1900            75
          1902            62
The years 1889 and 1901 were _minima_; the year 1893 a _maximum_.

exhibit an oscillation parallel to that of the solar spots, and

We must regard our sun as a globe of gas in a state of combustion,
and light.
(light sphere).
fire, whose roseate and transparent flames measure some 15,000
 This stratum of rose-colored flames
 It is
total eclipses of the Sun, when the dazzling disk of that luminary is
 The

From this agitated surface there is a constant ejection of gigantic
terrific speed to prodigious heights.

incandescent masses, known as prominences, which shot out like

eruptions can be observed every day in the spectroscope, and have been
the Society of Spectroscopists was founded with this especial object,

These prominences assume all imaginable forms, and often resemble our
velocity, often exceeding 200 kilometers (124 miles) per second, and
miles).

 31.
(141,500 miles) in height, _i.
_, 18 times the diameter of the Earth.

sometimes they shoot out into space like splendid curving roseate
the cleft and waving leaves of giant palm-trees.
remarkable type of solar spot, it is interesting to submit to the reader
 That reproduced
 It measured 228,000
earth (represented alongside in its relative magnitude).
 31.

more than 100,000 kilometers (62,000 miles), and then to fall back in a

Observation, in conjunction with spectral analysis, shows these
actual substance of the Sun, and projecting masses of incandescent

Nor is this all.
Moon as it passes in front of the Sun and intercepts its light, a
streaming out, like aigrettes, which extend a very considerable distance
 This aureole, the nature of which is still
 It is a sort of
 Our superb torch, accordingly,
phenomenal tempests whose flaming streamers extend afar.
these flames is so potent that it would swallow up our world at a single
crater.

researches estimate the temperature of the surface of the Sun at
 The internal temperature must be considerably higher.
crucible of molten iron poured out upon the Sun would be as a stream of

We can form some idea of this calorific force by making certain
 Thus, the heat given out appears to be equal to that which
voluminous as twelve hundred and eighty thousand terrestrial globes),
miles) in depth, all burning at equal combustion.
the Sun, at each second, is equal to that which would result from the
of coal, all burning together.
an hour, two trillions nine hundred milliards of cubic kilometers of

Our little planet, gravitating at 149,000,000 kilometers (93,000,000
a milliard part of this total radiation.

the Sun is its condensation.
globe represents for us the nucleus of a vast nebula, that extended in
contraction has finally produced this central focus.
law of transformation of motion into heat, this condensation, which has
level of temperature, and to maintain it there for millions of years.
addition, a substantial number of meteors is forever falling into it.
This furnace is a true pandemonium.

the Earth--that is to say, eighteen hundred and seventy octillions of

          (1,842,364,532,019,704,433,497,536,945 tons).

possible to weigh the Sun and determine its exact distance.


nature of the Sun, the stupendous orb on whose rays our very existence
 Its apparent dimension (which is only half a degree, 32', and
the same, by the tip of the little finger held out at arm's length),
e.
1,383,000 kilometers (more than 857,000 miles), and this is owing to the
 This distance of
appreciate.
to throw a bridge from here to the Sun, while 30 would suffice from the
 The Moon is 388 times nearer to us than the Sun.
may perhaps conceive of this distance by calculating that a train,
6214 mile) a minute, would
cross the distance that separates us from this orb.
duration of life, neither the travelers who set out for the Sun, nor
seventh generation would reach the goal, and only the fourteenth could

Children often cry for the Moon.
beings could stretch out its arms to touch the Sun, and burn its fingers
(when it would no longer be an infant), for the nervous impulse of
brain at a velocity of 28 meters per second.

 A cannon-ball would reach the Sun in ten years.
rapid arrow that flies through space at a velocity of 300,000 kilometers
to traverse this distance.


head of a vast planetary system.

shape, receiving their light and heat from the central star, on which
 The name of planets given to them signifies
 If you observe the Heavens on a fine starry night,
as described in a preceding chapter, you may be surprised on certain
modified by the temporary presence of a brilliant orb perhaps surpassing

If you watch this apparition for some weeks, and examine its position
changes its position more or less slowly in the Heavens.
orbs, or _planets_, do not shine with intrinsic light; they are

The planets, in effect, are bodies as opaque as the Earth, traveling
 They
groups by which we may recognize them: the first comprises four planets,
group, which are so voluminous that the least important of them is

In order of distance from the Sun, we first encounter:
          MERCURY, VENUS, THE EARTH, AND MARS
These are the worlds that are nearest to the orb of day.

distance:
          JUPITER, SATURN, URANUS, AND NEPTUNE
This second group is separated from the first by a vast space occupied
largest of which measures little more than 100 kilometers (62 miles) in

The planets which form these three groups represent the principal
 But the Sun is a patriarch, and each of his
of the fiery orb, are also obedient to the world that governs them.
These secondary asters, or _satellites_, follow the planets in their
round the Sun.
 All
more favored than ourselves in this respect, and having several.
has two; Jupiter, five; Saturn, eight; Uranus, four; and Neptune, one

In order to realize the relations between these worlds, we must

                         Millions of    Millions of
       Miles.
          Mercury             57              35
          The Earth          149              93
          Jupiter            775             481
          Uranus           2,831           1,755

the planets describe an ellipse) of this system, and controls them.
Neptune is thirty times farther from the Sun than the Earth.
disparities of distance produce a vast difference in the periods of the
year, Venus in 224 days, and Mercury in 88, Mars takes nearly 2 years to
Neptune 165.

paternity.
and irregular orbs that travel at a speed that is often most immoderate,
appears, to draw from its radiant source the provision of forces
 These are the
which at times they approximate very closely, at other times being

And now to recapitulate our knowledge of the Solar Empire.
place, we see a colossal globe of fire dominating and governing the
 Around him are grouped planets, in number
the central orb.
planets, which keep them within the sphere of their attraction.
lastly, the comets, irregular celestial bodies, track the whole extent
 To these might be added the whirlwinds of
Sun, and give origin to shooting stars, when they come into collision

Having now a general idea of our celestial family, and an appreciation
with the several members of which it is composed.


CHAPTER V
THE PLANETS
_A.

And now we are in the Solar System, at the center, or, better, at the
 We have appreciated
active waves that bear a fecundating illumination to the worlds that
Sun from the Earth, the third of the planets retained within his domain,
certain moving objects to traverse this distance have enabled us to

We said that the four planets nearest to the Sun are Mercury, at a
million (67,000,000 miles); the Earth, at 149 million (93,000,000
 Let us begin our



lingering shimmer of the twilight, now in the East, when the tender
first magnitude which remains but a very short time above the horizon,
 This is Mercury, the agile
commerce, and of thieves.
time, at the periods of his greatest elongations, either after the
aspect of a somewhat reddish star.

whose illumination he receives, and as he is in close juxtaposition with
 He
 His revolution round the Sun being
half, from one side to the other of the orb of day, and is alternately a
 The ancients originally regarded it as two
its identity.
once or twice a year, and then only by looking for it according to the

[Illustration: FIG.
--Orbits of the four Planets nearest to the Sun.

(35,000,000 miles), and accomplishes his revolution in 87 days, 23
e.
than three of our months.
as here, the existence of the Mercurians must be four times as short as
 A youth of twenty, awaking to the promise of the life he is
 There the
life, and might regret the years that pass too quickly away.
however, they are more philosophic than with us.

 33.
Sun.

not circular, but elliptical, and very eccentric, so elongated that at
focus, and receives only half as much heat and light as at the opposite
considerably.

 34.
]
This globe exhibits _phases_, discovered in the seventeenth century by
 They are due to the motions of
even a small instrument, one can follow the gradations and study Mercury
 Sometimes, again, he passes exactly in front of the
surface of the flaming orb.
November 10, 1894; and the phenomenon will recur on November 12, 1907,

Mercury is the least of all the worlds in our system (with the exception
that of Jupiter).
 His
to 1,000 (a little more than 1/3) and measures 4,750 kilometers (2,946
 His density is the highest of all the worlds in the great solar
less by almost 1/2.

sensibly tempers the solar heat, for the Sun exhibits to the Mercurians
are familiar on the Earth, and when Mercury is at perihelion (that is,
heat than we obtain at midsummer.
impossible for us to set foot on this planet without being shattered by

Yet we may well imagine that Nature's fecundity can have engendered
existence in the proximity of fire.
there be adorned with the luxuriant vegetation that develops rapidly

 35.
]
Observations of Mercury are taken under great difficulties, just because
patches that might be seas.
contradictory and uncertain.

the rotation.
must have produced strong tides, that would, as it were, have
Moon, forcing it perpetually to present the same side to the Sun.
the point of view of habitation, this situation would be somewhat
the other hemisphere, and a fairly large zone of twilight between the
 Such a condition would indeed be different from the succession of

As seen from Mercury, the Earth we inhabit would shine out in the starry
alongside, a faithful little companion.
star, the Earth being a brilliant orb of first magnitude, and the Moon
privileged abode.

our planet is the most beautiful and brilliant, as is Jupiter for
 The constellations are the same, viewed from Mercury or from

But is this little solar planet inhabited? We do not yet know.
only reply: why not?


of Orbs, and all Nature assumes the brooding veil of twilight, the most
star that is almost dazzling, and illuminates with its white and limpid

Hail, Venus, Queen of the Heavens! the "Shepherd's Star," gentle mother
and immortalized upon Earth, by poets and artists.
brilliancy attracted notice from earliest antiquity, and we find her,
to her and adorned their poetry with her grace and beauty.
her Callisto the Beautiful; Cicero names her Vesper, the evening star,
with Mercury.
and it was only when it came to be observed that the evening and the
the orb was recognized.

agility of Mercury created that of the messenger of the gods.

doves with white and fluttering wings, but we follow the lustrous orb
 And in the beautiful evenings
admires this white and dazzling Venus reigning as sovereign over our
who are practically occupied with astronomy, millions of eyes are raised
feel some curiosity about the mysteries of the Infinite.
of daily life would fain petrify our dreams, but thought is not yet
and when we gaze at the starry sky it is hard not to ask ourselves the
in the vast concert of sidereal harmony.

 36.
]
Even through a small telescope, Venus offers remarkable phases.

 37.
]
Fig.
planet's variations in magnitude during its journey round the Sun.
Imagine it to be rotating in a year of 224 days, 16 hours, 49 minutes, 8
Earth being at 149 million kilometers (93,000,000 miles).
at certain periods it passes between the Sun and ourselves, and as its
those times perceive only a sharp and very luminous crescent.
periods Venus is entirely, so to say, against the Sun, and presents to
 38).
Mercury, she passes immediately in front of the Sun, forming a perfectly
1882; and will recur on June 7, 2004, and June 5, 2012.
have been utilized in celestial geometry in measuring the distance of

You will readily divine that the distance of Venus varies considerably
the Sun and ourselves she is nearest to our world; but it is just at
only a slender crescent.
badly placed for the study of her physical constitution.
observations can be made when she is situated to right or left of the
choice, because at night there is too much irradiation from her dazzling

These phases were discovered by Galileo, in 1610.
among the first that confirmed the veracity of the system of Copernicus,
sun.
at dusk, or through light clouds.

 38.
]
Venus, surrounded by a highly dense and rarefied atmosphere, which
twin sister of the Earth, so similar are the dimensions of the two
 But, strange as it may seem to the many admirers, who are ready
this planet, attractive as she is at a distance, would be a less
 In fact, the atmosphere
must be always foggy.
discovered on her, despite the hopes of the eighteenth-century
 We are not even sure that she rotates upon herself, so
anything clearly upon her surface.
suffices to show the rotation of Mars or of Jupiter; but the beautiful

Several astronomers, and not the least considerable, think that the
pristine fluidity, must have been strong enough to seize and fix her, as
face to the Sun.
confirm this theoretical deduction from the calculations of celestial

The author ventures to disagree with this opinion, its apparent
contrary impression from all his telescopic observations.
recently (spring of 1903) repeated these observations.
remarkably clear and perfectly calm atmosphere, he examined the splendid

atmosphere of Venus; this is the line of separation between day and
 Beneath, at the extreme northern edge, he was attracted on each
surface of the planet, surrounded by a light-gray penumbra, giving the
poles of Mars.
Venus does not appear to be due to an effect of contrast, as has

Now, if the globe of Venus has poles, it must turn upon itself.

disk, indicative of the direction and speed of its rotary movement,
conditions.
blue, the planet but little removed from the meridian--at which time it

There is merely the impression; but it is so definite as to prevent the
as it gravitates round the Sun, presents always the same hemisphere.

peculiar world.

turned to the Sun; maximum cold and center of night at the antipodes.
This icy hemisphere would possibly be uninhabitable, but the resources
persistent, under the most disadvantageous and deplorable terrestrial
impossibility of existence, even in this eternal night.
the atmosphere would no doubt suffice to set up perpetual changes of
trade-winds would be the lightest of breezes.

powerful instruments of the observatories of the whole world have been
 All we know is that the diameter, surface, volume
sensibly from those that characterize our own globe: that this planet is
same elements.
 39), the
brilliant even than when viewed from Mercury.
first magnitude, accompanied by its moon, a star of the second and a

And thus the worlds float on in space, distant symbols of hopes not
evolution, representing an ever-growing progress in the sequence of the

[Illustration: FIG.
--The Earth viewed from Venus.

not form any definite idea as to her actual state as regards habitation,
to hail in her a celestial land, differing more or less from our own
general plan of Nature.

 In
order of distance, 149 million kilometers (93,000,000 miles) from the
not halt at this point, but cross in one step the distance that

Let us only remark in passing, that our planet is the largest of the
 Here are their comparative diameters:
                         The Earth = 1.
    In Miles.
          Mercury             0.
          Venus               0.
          Earth               1.
          Mars                0.




from the Sun is the planet Mars, gravitating in an orbit exterior to

Unfortunate Mars! What evil fairy presided at his birth? From
 He is the god of war
the peoples, it is he who pours out the blood of Humanity in
 Here, again, as in the case of Mercury and
 Mars, in fact, burns like
color that inspired its name and attributes, just as the dazzling
 Why, indeed,

defects inherent in its own terrestrial nature, this world, unwitting of
destiny.


 Mars accomplishes it in a
e.
days, or 687 days.
5
 Our planet,
(93,000,000 miles) from the central focus, is separated from Mars by an
orbit is equally elliptic and elongated it follows that at certain
million kilometers (37,000,000 miles).
for making the best observations upon our neighbor of the ruddy rays.
The oppositions of Mars arrive about every twenty-six months, but the
56 million kilometers (34,700,000 miles) of the Earth, occur only every

Mars is then passing perihelion, while our world is at aphelion (or
 At such epochs this globe presents to
e.
a telescope that magnifies 63 times would show him to us of the same
instrument that magnified 630 times would show him ten times larger in

In dimensions he differs considerably from our world, being almost half
 In diameter he measures only 6,728 kilometers
miles).
volume only 15/100 of our own.

 When
space a reduction of our own abode, with certain dissimilarities that

The Martian world weighs nine times and a half less than our own.
represent the weight of the Earth by 1,000, that of Mars would be
 His density is much less than our own; it is only
 A man weighing 70 kilograms, transported to the

The earliest telescopic observations revealed the existence of more or
 The progress of
patches more clearly, while the study of their motions enabled the
of this planet.
65 seconds.
and night are accordingly a little longer on Mars than on the Earth, but
 The year of Mars consists of
 The inclination of the axis of rotation of this globe
 In
the length, the Martian year being almost equal to two of our years.
intensity of the seasons is indeed more accentuated than upon the Earth,
 But there, as here, are three

By means of the telescope we can follow the variations of the Martian
aggregate during the winter, and melt no less regularly during the heat
 These snows are very easily observed, and stand out
 The reader can judge of them by the
of the recent oppositions of Mars (1900-1901).
diminished from 4,680 kilometers to 840.
summer was on April 11th.

corresponds to our month of August, as never happens with our polar ice.
Hence, though this planet is farther away from the Sun than ourselves,
polar snows are much less thick.

atmosphere is almost always limpid, and one can say that fine weather is
 At times, light fogs or a little vapor
sky clears up again.

 40.
the summer.

have been made, depicting Mars under every aspect, and the agreement
with the planet to admit of our indicating the characteristic features

as made (February, 1901) at the Observatory of Juvisy, and from the
 41, 42 and

It will be seen at the first glance that the geography of Mars is very
are covered with the liquid element, Mars seems to be more evenly
 We find no
islands; on the contrary, the seas are reduced to long gulfs compressed
certain that these gray spots do all represent true seas.
agreed to term _sea_ the parts that are lightly tinged with green, and
 That is the
resemble that of the Sahara, or, to take a less arid region, that seen
Esterels; or perhaps to some peculiar vegetation.
balloon, the author has often remarked that the hue of the ripe corn,
continents of Mars in the best hours for observation.

 41.
,
]
As to the "seas," it is pretty certain that there must be water, or
snows in spring and summer; but it may possibly be in conjunction with
to us from here to be the more considerable in proportion as the water

[Illustration: FIG.
--Telescopic aspect of the planet Mars (Feb.
1901).

retains the rays of the Sun, and must preserve a medium temperature

whether animal or vegetable, which is effected upon our planet by the
streams, comes about quite differently on Mars; for, as was remarked
 Instead of being
the source of the polar snows finds its way into the canals and seas,
vapors directed from the equator to the poles.

We have spoken of _canals_.
world is incontestably the appearance of straight lines that furrow its
 M.
Schiaparelli, the distinguished Director of the Observatory of Milan,
postulating anything as to their real nature.
These straight lines, measuring sometimes 600 kilometers (372 miles) in
the same hue as the seas on which they open.
they have been surveyed by the greater number of our observers.
must be confessed that, even with the best instruments, we only approach
little far off, and we may be sure that we do not distinguish the true
[11] These details at the limits of visibility
 They may possibly be lines
 The future will no doubt clear up this mystery for

[Illustration: FIG.
--Chart of Mars.

favorable as our Earth for habitation, and it would be difficult to
 It appears to us, on
very living world.
density of our own, and resembles that of the highest mountains.
conditions of existence there vary from ours, and appear to be more

There as here, day succeeds to night, spring softens the rigors of
have such frequent reason to complain.

up any force there, on account of the rarity of the atmosphere, and the

Differing from ours, this world may well be a more congenial
 It is more ancient than the Earth, smaller, less massive.
has run more quickly through the phases of its evolution.
life is more advanced, and its Humanity should be superior to our own,
coarse and barbarous than we are at present: the law of progress governs
Mars is less dense than our own.

these unknown beings.
signals, but high summits or light clouds illuminated by the rising or
 But the idea of communication with them in the future is no
analysis, X-rays, or wireless telegraphy.

than on the Earth, because humanity itself has advanced further, and
the limpidity of its pure, clear atmosphere.

round Mars; they are called Phobos and Deimos.
of 6,000 kilometers (3,730 miles) from the surface, accomplishes its
the entire circle of the Heavens three times a day.
gravitates at 20,000 kilometers (12,400 miles), and turns round its
 These two
 Hall, at the University of Washington,

       *       *       *       *       *
Among the finest and most interesting of the celestial phenomena admired
Sun has plunged into his fiery bed, now in the morning, a little before
from the orb of day, which presents to them the same aspects as does
 This splendid orb, which has doubtless received the
of a beautiful greenish blue, courses in space accompanied by a little
clear sky of Mars.
accompanying it is the Moon.

 44.
]
Yes, to the Martians our Earth is a star of the morning and evening;
 Many a vow, and many a hope
permitted its unrealized dreams to wander forth to our planet as to an
might find a haven.
imagine.

Jupiter.


CHAPTER VI
THE PLANETS
_B.


moments upon the minor planets which circulate between the orbit of Mars
 These minute asters, little worlds, the largest of
are fragments of cosmic matter that once belonged to a vast ring, formed
instead of condensing into a single globe coursing between Mars and
at the present time the curious and highly interesting Republic of the

These lilliputian worlds at first received the names of the more
Vesta, etc.
necessary to call them by modern, terrestrial names, and more than one
inscribed in the Heavens.
first day of the nineteenth century, January 1, 1801, by Piazzi,
 While he was observing the small stars in the
astronomer noticed one that he had never seen before.

he perceived that the fair unknown had moved her station, and the
the visitor: she was a planet, a wandering star among the
 This newcomer was registered

Since that epoch several hundreds of them have been discovered,
kilometers (249,000,000 miles).
to the naked eye, but no year passes without new and numerous recruits
the patient observers of the Heavens.
discovered by the photographic method of following the displacement of





While Mercury measures only 4,750 kilometers (2,946 miles) in diameter,
kilometers (87,400 miles) in breadth; that is to say, eleven times
 He is 442,500 kilometers (274,357 miles) in

In volume he is equivalent to 1,279 terrestrial globes; hence he is only
 The previously described planets
only an insignificant mass in comparison with this colossus.
and twenty-six Earths joined into one group would present a surface
titanic world.
we inhabit.
twice and a half times as great there as here.
things and beings are thus composed of materials lighter than those upon
half times as powerful, they are in reality heavier and weigh more.
graceful maiden weighing fifty kilograms would if transported to Jupiter
"
Jupiter rotates upon himself with prodigious rapidity.
his diurnal revolution in less than ten hours! There the day lasts half
the Jovian would count thirty-six.
twelve of ours, the almanac of that planet would contain 10,455 days!
enumerate all the dates in this vast world.

kilometers (480,500,000 miles) from the Sun.
(5.
times vaster than our own.
five times smaller than that which we see, and its surface is
receives on an average twenty-seven times less light and heat than we

In the telescope Jupiter presents an aspect analogous to that likely to
vapors (Fig.

It is, in fact, the seat of formidable perturbations, of strange
ancient formation than the Earth, this celestial giant has not yet
 Owing to its
heat, revolving in space as an obscure Sun, but perhaps still burning.
In it we see what our own planet must have been in its primordial epoch,

[Illustration: FIG.
--Telescopic aspect of Jupiter.

comes back into opposition with the Sun every 399 days, _i.
_, 1 year,
 At these
by the Earth, is prolonged to the Sun.
selected for observation.
star of the first magnitude, of excessive whiteness: nor can it be
visible at midnight, in the full South, but is South-west in the
ruddy.

enlargement of forty times shows us to be the same size to all
 Its shape is


We know that the Earth's axis dips a certain quantity on the plane of

 His axis of rotation remains almost
absence of climates and seasons.
tropic zone; the position of Jupiter is eternally that of the Earth at
perpetual spring.
winter.
equator to the poles without abrupt transitions, and the duration of day
latitude.

extensive variations than could be produced by the Sun at such a
 Spectral analysis detects a large amount of water-vapor,
intrinsic heat.

markings (gray and white, sometimes tinted yellow, or of a maroon or
vicinity of the equator.
modified, either in form or color.
cut up; at others they are interspersed with more or less brilliant
 These patches are not affixed to the surface of the globe, like
planet like the satellites, in more or less elongated and regular
atmosphere, while observation of their motion does not give the exact
 Some only appear upon the agitated

One has been observed for over a quarter of a century, and appears to be
 This spot, which was red at
 It is oval (_vide_ Fig.
45) and measures 42,000 kilometers (26,040 miles) in length by 15,000
 Hence it is about four times as long
Jupiter, as are the dimensions of Australia in proportion to our globe.
The discussion of a larger number of observations leads us to see in it
mobile and still liquid and heated surface of the giant Jupiter.
patch, however, oscillates perceptibly, and appears to be a floating

We must add that this vast world, like the Sun, _does not rotate all in
 Eight different currents can be perceived upon its surface.
The most rapid is that of the equatorial zone, which accomplishes its
 A point situated on the
miles) per second, and it is this giddy velocity of Jupiter that has
 From the equator to the poles, the
amounts to about five minutes between the movement of the equatorial
 But what is more
to certain fluctuations; thus, in the last quarter of a century, the
 In 1879,
have already seen, 9 hours, 50 minutes, 29 seconds, which represents a
 The rotation of the red patch, at 25 degrees of

We are confronted with a strange and mysterious world.
of the future.

satellites.

   Distance from surface of Jupiter.

     Miles.
   Hours.
  5.
  1.
  2.
  3.
  4.

time, on the same evenings (January 7 and 8, 1610), by the two
Italy, and Simon Marius in Germany.

 Barnard, astronomer of the Lick Observatory,
the enormous planet.
fifth, although the four principal are numbered in the order of their

[Illustration: FIG.
--Jupiter and his four principal satellites.

(Fig.

Such is the splendid system of the mighty Jupiter.
fine planet illuminated the troop of worlds that derived their treasure
moons in their turn shed upon the extinct central globe the pale soft
Jovian nights (which last less than five hours, on account of the

At the distance of the first satellite, Jupiter exhibits a disk
dazzling spectacle, what a fairy scene must the enormous star afford to
Earth and Moon present in the face of such a body, a real miniature of

Olympus to this majestic planet.
real grandeur.
 Here
of the fables of mythology.

for the inhabitants of the other worlds beyond the distance of Jupiter.

SATURN
Turn back now for a moment to the plan of the Solar System.

the Sun, in order to reach the immense orb of Jupiter, which courses in
orbit.
kilometers (400,000,000 miles) in order to reach the marvelous system of

Son of Uranus and Vesta, Saturn was the God of Time and Fate.
generally represented as an aged man bearing a scythe.
character is only the expression of his celestial aspect, as we have
the agile Mercury.
the planets known to the ancients.
accomplishment, and at that distance the Saturnian world, though it
exhibits to our eyes a pale and leaden hue.
Time, with slow and almost funereal gait.

 He bore the
evil fates,--whereof he is wholly innocent, troubling himself not at all

This world travels in the vastness of the Heavens at a distance of 1,421
 Hence it is ten
illuminated and governed by the Sun-God.
larger than our own.

e.
years, 167 days, and as this strange planet rotates upon itself with
25,217 days.
prodigious memory not to get hopelessly involved in this interminable
 A curious world, where each year stands for almost
ours.
differences on this planet.

world.
of its poles, which is one-tenth, exceeds that of all the other planets,
 It follows that its equatorial diameter is 112,500
110,000 kilometers (68,200).

only 128/1000 of our own; _i.
_, the materials of which it is composed
Earth.
insignificant proportion.

 47.
]
The dipping of Saturn's axis of rotation is much the same as our own.
Hence we conclude that the seasons of this planet are analogous to ours
 Only upon this far-off world each season lasts
 At the distance at which it gravitates in space, the
than such as reach our selves; but it apparently possesses an atmosphere
preserved, and the planet maintained in a calorific condition but little

In the telescope, the disk of Saturn exhibits large belts that recall

 There are doubtless zones of clouds or rapid currents circulating
 Spots are also visible whose displacement assists in

The most extraordinary characteristic of this strange world is, however,
entirely envelops the body of the planet.
Saturnian sky, like a gigantic triumphal arch, at a height of some
 This splendid arch
 From here we
ring seems to pass in front of Saturn, and its shadow is visible on the

This ring, which measures 284,000 kilometers (176,080 miles) in
into three distinct zones: the exterior is less luminous than the
very dark, and spreads out like a dusky and faintly transparent veil,

What is the nature of these vast concentric circles that surround the
of particles, of a quantity of cosmic fragments, which are swept off in
distance.
hours, 50 minutes, and the most distant in about 12 hours, 5 minutes, to
centrifugal force sustains them in space.

 48.
from the Earth.

can not refrain from emotion on contemplating this marvel, whereby one
diadem.
may be seen from the subjoined figure (Fig.

We must not quit the Saturnian province without mentioning the eight

        Distance from the planet.

       Miles.
   Hours.

 Mimas         207,000       128,340                22         37
 Enceladus     257,600       159,712        1        8         53
 Tethys        328,800       203,856        1       21         18
 Dione         421,200       261,144        2       17         41
 Rhea          588,400       364,808        4       12         25
 Titan       1,364,000       845,680       15       22         41
 Hyperion    1,650,000     1,023,000       21        6         39
 Japhet      3,964,000     2,457,680       79        7         54
Here is a marvelous system, with, what is more, eight different kinds of
varying phases juggling above the rings!
Now we shall cross at a bound the 1,400 million kilometers (868,000,000
solar system.

URANUS
On March 13, 1781, William Herschel, a Hanoverian astronomer who had
himself to the sublime science of the Heavens, was observing the vast
luminous point that appeared to him to exceed that of the other
 He replaced the magnification of his
diameter of the orb increased proportionately with the amplification of
distance.
the slow and imperceptible movement of this star upon the celestial
much nearer orb, in all probability a comet, for the great astronomer
 And it was thus, under
announced.
arrival, to discover for it an elliptical orbit such as most comets
 But their efforts were vain, and after several months' study the
limits of the solar system to a point far beyond that of the Saturnian

This new world received the name of Uranus, father of Saturn, his
 Uranus shines in the firmament as
normal sight, at a distance of 2,831,000,000 kilometers (1,755,000,000
 Smaller than Jupiter and Saturn, this planet is yet
presenting proportions that claim our respect and admiration.

that is, rather more than four times the breadth of the terrestrial
 Sixty-nine times more voluminous than the Earth, and seventeen
own in density.
lighter than that of our globe.

atmosphere very different from that which we breathe, enclosing gases

The Uranian globe courses over the fields of infinity in a vast orbit
days, _i.
_, 84 years, 8 days.
pale and languishing rays of the Sun, which sends it nearly three
 At this distance
that which we admire, and a surface three hundred times less vast.
dull world indeed! And what an interminable year! The idle people who
than upon our little Earth, where the days pass so rapidly.
matters are arranged there as here, a babe of a year old, beginning to
man of eighty-four in this world.

fact that the four moons which accompany the planet accomplish their
thirteen days, as is shown in the following table:
                Distance from the planet.

      Miles.
 Hours.

  1.
  2.
  3.
  4.

of the other planets.
Saturn accomplish their revolution from east to west, the satellites of
doubtless the same for the rotation of the planet.

we should prefer Mars to Uranus, where everything must be so different
planet might afford us some agreeable surprises.
rien.

NEPTUNE
And here we reach the frontier of the Solar System, as actually known to
 In landing on the world of Neptune, which circles through the
kilometers (2,480,000,000 miles) from the common center of attraction of

Uranus was discovered with the telescope, Neptune by calculation.
addition to the solar influence, the worlds exert a mutual attraction

many of the perturbations in our great solar family.
observations of the position of Uranus in space, some inexplicable
 The astronomers having full faith in
attribute these irregularities to the influence of some unknown planet
 But at what distance?
A very simple proportion, known as Bode's law, has been observed, which
Sun.
successively,
          0  3  6  12  24  48  96  192  384.

following series:
          4  7  10  16  28  52  100  196  388.

the Sun be represented by 10, the figure 4 represents the orbit of
medium distance of the minor planets; the distances of Jupiter, Saturn,

The immortal French mathematician Le Verrier, who pursued the solution
must be at the distance of 388, and made his calculations accordingly.
Its direction in the Heavens was indicated by the form of the
the disturbing factor.

ultra-Uranian planet, and on September 23d following, a German
this intelligence, pointed his telescope toward the quarter of the

mathematics, had detected, and, as it were, touched at pen's point the

Only, it is proved by observation and calculation that it is less remote
distance of 300, given that from the Earth to the Sun as 10.

of Jupiter.
in darkness in the depths of the sea, and Le Verrier's orb is also

Adams, who had simultaneously made the same calculations as Le Verrier,
 His work

The English command the seas, and wherever they dip their finger into
that "Neptune's trident is the scepter of the world," hence this

Neptune is separated by a distance of four milliards, four hundred

At such a distance, thirty times greater than that which exists between
and heat than ourselves; _i.
_, Spitzbergen and the polar regions of
temperature.
presents in the telescope the aspect of a star of the eighth magnitude.
With powerful magnifications it is possible to measure its disk, which
 Its diameter is four times
miles), its surface is sixteen times vaster than that of the Earth, and
similar to our own.
here, but its medium density is only 1/3 that of the Earth.

than that of our globe, and its revolution takes 164 years, 281 days,
e.
 A single year of Neptune thus covers
 Existence must, indeed, be

(29-3/8 miles) per second, and the Earth 29-1/2 (18-1/8 miles), Neptune
3-1/4 miles) per second.

details of his surface, but spectral analysis reveals the presence of an
planet, and of which the chemical composition resembles that of the

One satellite has been discovered for Neptune.
inclination, and rotates from east to west.


 After
admiration and gratitude toward the luminary that governs, warms, and

In conclusion, let us again insist that the Earth,--a splendid orb as
where she becomes no more than a tiny spark oscillating from side to
black dot.
reduced.
eyes constructed like our own.
importance with which we would endow ourselves.

will leave him to watch over the distant frontier; but before returning
capricious comets, which imprint their airy flight upon the realms of






What marvels have been reviewed by our dazzled eyes since the outset of
people the vast firmament of Heaven; next we admired and wondered at
depths of space, crossing at a bound the abyss that separates us from
terrible suns of infinity, we landed on our own beloved orb, the superb
 Thence we visited his celestial family, his
 But the journey would
occasionally approach the Sun and Earth, some of which may even collide
 These are in the first place the

Glittering, swift-footed heralds of Immensity, these comets with golden
their presence.

pyrotechnics, the arch of Heaven is illuminated with their fantastic


analysis, and of astral photography, we were anterior to Galileo, and to
the comet is an object of terror, a dangerous menace that appears to
fatal misfortunes to the inhabitants of our planet.
in the Heavens? The reigning prince may make his testament and prepare
 Another apparition in the firmament bodes war, famine, the
 The astrologers had an open field, and
that misfortunes, great or small, are not altogether rare in this

How many intellects, and those not the most vulgar, from antiquity to
stars, which brought desolation to the heart of man, and poured their
 The history of the
for the most thrilling of romances.
would be little flattering to the common-sense of our ancestors.
the respect we owe our forefathers, let us recall for a moment the
observed from the Earth, has been preserved to us in history.

 49.
]
       *       *       *       *       *
Without going back to the Deluge, we note that the Romans established a
C.
had been assassinated a few months previously.
the soul of their great Captain, transported to Heaven to reign in the
 Were not the Emperors Lords of both

emancipated themselves from these superstitions, and we may cite the
of a flaming comet: "Fear nothing," he said, "this bearded star concerns
since he is hairy and I am bald.

Heavens.
 Directly the King
conclude from the apparition.
tried to avert the augury by prayers to Heaven, by ordaining a general
 Notwithstanding, he
coincidence to set up a correlation between the fatal star and the death
 This comet, famous in history, is no other than that

This comet returned to explore the realms near the Sun in 1066, at the
and was misguided enough to go across and reign in London, instead of
everlasting rivalry between France and this island.
influence was attributed to the comet in the Battle of Hastings.

three years after the capture of Constantinople by the Turks.
ran high in Europe, and this celestial omen was taken for a proof of the
 The moment was decisive; the Christians had to be
 At this
disuse, the _Angelus_; and ordered that the bells of the churches should
in prayer against the Turks and the Comet.
to our own day.

death of Bartholomew Diaz, a celebrated Portuguese navigator, who

In 1528 a bearded star of terrific aspect alarmed the world, and the
burned in the Heavens like "a great and gory sword.
Celestial Monsters the celebrated surgeon Ambroise Paré describes this
us the menacing sword surrounded by the heads it had cut off (Fig.

[Illustration: FIG.
--What our Ancestors saw in a Comet.

_]
[Illustration: FIG.
--Prodigies seen in the Heavens by our
]
Omens of battle, 1547.


Cavalry, and a bloody branch crossing the sun, June 11, 1554.

less credulous, can study the facsimile reproduced in Fig.
drawings published in the year 1557 by Conrad Lycosthenes in his curious

So, too, it is asserted that Charles V renounced the jurisdiction of his
because he was terrified by the comet of 1556 which burned in the skies
and devotion.

but the imagination that sees in them such dramatic figures must indeed
 In the Middle Ages and the Renaissance these were swords of
, all horrible objects ready

them: "The Bearded Ones let loose their hair like a majestic beard; the
point, it is called the Sword; this is the palest of all the Comets; it
conformity with its figure; its color is amber, the Barrel is actually
through it; the Horn imitates the figure of a horn erected in the sky,
mane, shaken violently with a circular motion.
comets; these resemble the skins of beasts with the fur on them, and are
 Lastly, the tails of certain comets have
"
These hairy orbs that appear in all directions, and whose trajectories
appear to obey no regular law.
perspicacious Kepler had not divined their true character, seeing in
of vapor, losing itself in space.
assimilated with the other members of our grand solar family where,

And even in our own times, have we not seen the people terrified at the
comets been often enough predicted? These predictions are so to speak
formations is announced by the astronomers, and always meet with a

       *       *       *       *       *
To-day we know that these wanderers are subject to the general laws
 The great Newton announced that, like the
follow an extremely elongated curve, and return periodically to the
 From the basis of these data Halley calculated the
presented such similarity with the apparitions of 1531 and 1607, that he
return about the year 1759.
irresistibly attracted by the Orb of Day, the comet, at first pale, then
calculation, three years after the death of the illustrious astronomer.
Shining upon his grave it bore witness to the might of human thought,

Earth, and has already been seen twenty-four times by the astonished
 It appears, however, to be diminishing in magnitude.
last appearance was in 1835, and we shall see it again in 1910, a little
time slightly accelerated its course, while in 1759 it retarded it.

round the Sun, or parabolic, dashing out into space.
they are periodic (Fig.
 In the
eternity to reappear no more.

 52.
]
Their speed is even greater than that of the planets, it is equivalent
414.
Thus at the distance of the Earth from the Sun this velocity = 29,500
41,700 meters (over 25 miles).
1.

Among the numerous comets observed, we do not as yet know more than some
 Periodicity in these
multitude of comets that circle through the Heavens.
exaggerate when he said "there are as many comets in the skies as there
" These scouts of the sidereal world constitute a
clad in gold, it is because the more modest privates can only be
 Long before the invention of the latter,
but they defied the human eye, too weak to detect them.
regarded as rare and terrible objects that no one dared to contemplate.
To-day they may be counted by hundreds.
in originality; but science is the gainer, since she has thus endowed
 No year passes without the
 But the fine apparitions

These eccentric visitors do not resemble the planets, for they have no
 They are
density.
the smallest stars are visible through its tail, and even through the

They arrive in every direction from the depths of space, as though to

Attracted by some potent charm toward this dazzling focus, they come
 At first pale
fervid heat.
the radiant light.
the day-star penetrates them with his burning splendor, illuminates them
 But the Sun is
 Having showered benefits upon these gorgeous celestial
grants them liberty to visit other heavens, to seek fresh universes.
.

The original parabola is converted into an ellipse, if the imprudent
as Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, or Neptune, and suffers its attraction.
is then imprisoned by our system, and can no longer escape from it.
After reenforcement at the solar focus, it must return to the identical
 Henceforward,

other systems.


 There is
nebulosity called the _hair_, or _brush_, and prolonged in a luminous
 The _head_ of the comet is the

[Illustration: FIG.
--The tails of Comets are opposed to the Sun.

the course of its peregrinations.
 The appendix may
say, it is situated on the prolongation of a straight line, starting
 53).
not exist, so long as the comet is at a distance from the orb of day;
birth to those mysterious tails and fantastic streamers whose
 The dilations and
repulsive force emanating from the Sun, an electric charge transmitted
 It is as though Phoebus blew upon them

Telescopic comets are usually devoid of tail, even when they reach the
 They appear as pale nebulosities, rounded or oval,
nucleus.
course, when they reach a point not far from the Sun and the terrestrial

The finest comets of the last century were those of 1811, 1843, 1858,
 The Great Comet of 1811, after
providence of the vine-growers.
abundant that year, the peasants attributed this happy result to the

In 1843 one of these strange messengers from the Infinite appeared in
 It was so brilliant that it was visible in full daylight on
 This splendid comet was
kilometers (186,000,000 miles) in length, and its flight was so rapid
representing a speed of 550 kilometers (342 miles) a second.

the Sun that it must have traversed its flames, and yet emerged from

Noteworthy also was the comet of 1858 (Fig.
by Donati.
(55,900,000 miles), and its nucleus had a diameter of at least 900
 It is a curious coincidence that the wine was

The comet of 1861 almost rivaled the preceding.

very inferior to the last two.
appeared in 1882.
at a speed of 480 kilometers (299 miles) per second.
gaseous atmosphere of the orb of day, and then continued its course
 On the day of, and that following, its perihelion, it
the Heavens beside the dazzling solar luminary.
neither that of 1858 nor of 1861.

but we are prepared to give any such a reception worthy of their
longer awestruck; second, because we would gladly study them more

       *       *       *       *       *
In short, these hirsute stars, whose fantastic appearance impressed the
 Their
gases.
resembling that of many nebulæ; the presence of carbon is more
 Even the nucleus is not solid, and is often

It is fair to say that the action of a comet might be deleterious if one
 The transformation of
oxygen of our atmosphere might produce a conflagration, or a general

But the collision of a comet with a planet is almost an impossibility.
This phenomenon could only occur if the comet crossed the planetary
 When we
traversed by a world in its annual journey round the Sun, and the speed

terrestrial orbit.
globe in the nights of October 29 and 30 in that year; but the Earth
was more than 80,000,000 kilometers (50,000,000 miles) away from the

On June 30, 1861, however, the Earth passed through the extremity of the
 No one even noticed it.
effects were doubtless quite immaterial.

we shall presently see, we came with flying colors out of that
reduced to powder.
likely to come to us from comets.
destruction of humanity by these windy bags.

azure night are not concerned with us; they seem to have no other
indifferent to the astonishment they produce in us.
restlessly and tirelessly through infinity; they are the Amazons of

What suns, what worlds must they have visited since the moment of their
wanderings, how gladly should we listen to the enchanting descriptions
explorers are dumb; they tell none of their secrets, and we must needs

Yet, some of them have left us a modest token of remembrance, an almost
thanks to the considerate messenger.


phosphorescent lights that glide through the somber night, leaving a
meteor?
Sometimes, when Night has silently spread the immensity of her wings
shades of evening from the starry vault, shooting lightly through the

[Illustration: FIG.
--A Meteor.


direction through space, sowing the fine dust of their gilded wings upon
 They are born to die; their life is only a breath;
the profoundest.

night smiles at this charming sister in the Heavens (Fig.
 What can
the shy messenger of the happiness so long desired? Its unpremeditated
 It is
a sudden and ephemeral pleasure.
.
 The radiant meteor seems to quit the
voice that seeks its succor.

is the friend of the betrothed who invoke its passage to confide their
 Tradition holds that if a
certainly be fulfilled before the year is out.
however, this is but a surviving figment of the ancestral imagination,
Humanity.
.
 Besides, try to express a wish distinctly in a second!
It is a curious fact that while comets have so often spread terror on
benevolent feelings at all times.
dainty excursionists from the celestial shores are not, as is supposed,
 They are atoms, nothings, minute fragments deriving in
 They come to us from a vast
around the Sun, following a very elongated ellipse which closely
 Their flight is extremely rapid,
cometary speed that is, as we have seen, greatly above that of our
miles).

orbit of a swarm of meteors crosses our planet, a violent shock arises,
first second if we meet the star shower directly; the average rate,
meteors nearly always cross our path obliquely.
arrive is usually 110 kilometers (68 miles), and 80 kilometers (50
have been observed at 300 kilometers (186 miles).

transforms the motion into heat.
true stars with a brilliancy that is often magnificent.

 The excessive heat resulting from
slowly to the Earth, where they are deposited on the surface of the soil
 Some one
the unaided eye, and many more in the telescope; the effect of these
globe, a slight lessening of its rotary motion, and the acceleration of

Although the appearance of shooting stars is a common enough phenomenon,
arrive in swarms, from different quarters of the sky.
remarkable dates in this connection are the night of August 10th and the
 Every one knows the shooting stars of August
to general contemplation of the Heavens.
12th, and even beyond, but the maximum is on the 10th.
very clear, and there is no moon, hundreds of shooting stars can be
 They all seem to
_radiant_, and is situated for the August swarm in the constellation of
 Our
 Lawrence, because the
 These shooting stars describe a
the Great Comet of 1862.

abundant than the preceding.
so numerous that they were described as showers of rain, especially on
 For several hours the sky was furrowed with falling
 An English mariner, Andrew Ellicot, who made the drawing we
 55), described the phenomenon as stupendous and alarming
M.
 The same occurred on November 13, 1833.
meteors that scarred the Heavens on that night were reckoned at 240,000.
These shooting stars received the name of _Leonids_, because their

[Illustration: FIG.
--Shooting Stars of November 12, 1799.

_]
This swarm follows the same orbit as the comet of 1866, which travels as
thirty-three years.
apparition in 1899, but the expectations of the astronomers were
 All the preparations for the appropriate reception of
 The
registration of only a very small number of meteors.
thirteen.
 There
 This swarm has become

The night of November 27th again is visited by a number of shooting
 This
and a half years, and down to 1846 it responded punctually to the
 But on
went its own way, side by side, to return within sight from the Earth in
 It was their last appearance.
still be seen, though pale and insignificant.
the depths of night, and never appeared again.
vain, and were despaired of, when on November 27, 1872, instead of the
 They fell

The same phenomenon recurred on November 27, 1885, and confirmed the
shooting stars.


from the weak telescopic sparks that vanish like a flash of lightning,
atmosphere.

 56 shows an example of these, and it represents a fire-ball


This phenomenon may occur by day as well as by night.
accompanied by one or several explosions, the report of which is
meteorites.
fragments, scattered in all directions.
fire-ball fall to the surface of the Earth, under the name of aerolites,
not from our atmosphere.

popular superstitions were attached; and the Greeks even gave the name

[Illustration: FIG.
--Fire-Ball seen from the Observatory at Juvisy,
]
[Illustration: FIG.
--Explosion of a Fire-Ball above Madrid,
]
No year passes without the announcement of several showers of
witness it.
above Madrid, February 10, 1896, a fragment from which, sent me by M.
Arcimis, Director of the Meteorological Institute, fell immediately in
 57).
30
M.
 The flash of the explosion was so dazzling
thunder was heard seventy seconds after, and it was believed that an
 The fire-ball burst at a height of

fire-ball may be seen beneath a rainbow (Fig.
to preserve the remembrance of it, as it fell near Milan, on September
 This picture dates from 1512.

sizes, from the impalpable dust that floats in the air, to the enormous
 Many of them
 That represented below fell in Mexico
 It weighed about four

[Illustration: FIG.
--Raphael's Fire-Ball (_The Madonna of
]
These bolides and uranoliths come to us from the depths of space; but
 They
planetary volcanoes.
the volcanoes of the Moon.
predominates, may even have issued from the bowels of the Earth,
globe was perpetually convulsed by cataclysms of extraordinary violence.
They return to us to-day after being removed from the Earth to distances
 This origin seems
mineral composition identical with that of the terrestrial materials.

 59.
]
In any case, these uranoliths bring us back at least by their fall to
position in space, and to take account of the place it fills in the





Our grand celestial journey lands us upon our own little planet, on this
circulating like her brothers of the solar system, around the colossal

The Earth! The name evokes in us the image of Life, and calls up the
 Does it


 We learned this much in our first
 It is a globe of opaque material, similar to the planets
, as previously described.
on all sides in space, it revolves round the Sun, along a vast orbit
 And while it thus glides along the lines
twenty-four hours.

the evidence of our senses.

there is no longer room to doubt that it is a globe, a sort of ball that
 A journey round the world is common enough to-day, and
Earth.
proof.
the sky from the ocean, it seems to be hanging on the horizon.
little, however, as it recedes, it drops below the horizon line; the
 The observer on board
 The low shores are first to

The aspect of the Heavens gives another proof of the Earth's rotundity.
As one travels North or South, new stars rise higher and higher above
the latitude one is leaving, gradually disappear.
Earth were flat, the ships on the sea would be visible as long as our
be equally visible from the different quarters of the world.

Earth upon our satellite is always round.
spherical nature of the terrestrial globe.

other planets of the great solar family.
our world circulating under the starry vault, like luminous points whose
 For us they are marvelous celestial
 The Earth is
 It is supported by nothing.
assumes a lovely iridescence in the rays of the Sun, or, better, like
support.

form a false notion of weight.

the Earth from falling.
capable of holding up this block of no inconsiderable weight could be.
At first they thought it floated on the waters like an island.
postulated solid pillars, or even supposed it might turn on pivots
 But on what would all these imaginary supports have
and it was recognized as a globe, isolated in every part.
of the ancients, which still obtains for a great many citizens of our

Weight and attraction are one and the same force.

body.
are always downward.

The terrestrial globe may be regarded as an immense ball of magnet, and
 We weigh toward the center.
may travel over this surface in all directions; our feet will always be
 For us, "below" is the
extend above our heads, right round the globe.

absurdity.
itself.

exists around it, in the infinity of the Heavens.
opposed to another is called its _antipodes_.
approximately the antipodes to France.
Zealand and of France the top is reciprocally opposed, and the bottom,
 And yet, for one as for
space above their heads.

 Whatever is above us,
g.
give the same qualification to the part of space that was under our feet
 What is in the sky, and over our heads, at a given hour, is
 Our
to hour, and "top" and "bottom" vary also, relatively to our position.

1/292).
miles); from one pole to the other is a little less, owing to the
 The difference is some 43 kilometers

Its circumference is 40,000 kilometers (24,900 miles).
surrounded by an aerial envelope, the atmosphere, the height of which
observations made on certain shooting stars.

beautiful azure blue that seems to separate us from the sidereal abyss,
clouds, and giving the illusion of resting far off on the circle of the
 But this is only an illusion.
vault nor horizon; space is open in all directions.
did not exist, or if it were completely transparent, we should see the
at midnight, and we can see them in the full daylight, with the help of
 In fact, certain stars (the radiant Venus and
with the unaided eye in full daylight.

square miles).
surface, _i.
_, 383,200,000 square kilometers (150,000,000 square
(55,000 square miles).
the total superficies of the globe.

by the waters, the terrestrial globe is fairly regular, and in relation
 The
ocean, do not attain to the millionth part of its diameter.

globe of water of the same dimensions.

          (6,833,000,000,000,000,000,000 tons).


          6,263,000,000,000,000,000 kilograms

Each of us carries an average weight of some 17,000 kilograms (16 tons)
 Perhaps some one will ask how it is that we are not
strength, but to which, nevertheless, we appear insensible.
because the aerial fluid enclosed within our bodies exerts a pressure
pressures are at equilibrium.

relatively to the other worlds of our system.
rays, like the dazzling Jupiter, like all the planets, she courses
 Bigger
comparison with the enormous Jupiter, the strange system of Saturn, of
 For us her greatest interest is that she
scarcely notice her.
star, returning to space the light she receives from the Sun.
distance of our satellite, she shines like an enormous moon, fourteen
 Observed from
purity as Jupiter does for us.
morning and evening star, presenting phases similar to those which Mars
 From Jupiter, the terrestrial globe is little
solar rays.
people exist, they probably ignore our existence altogether.
likelihood it is the same for the rest of the universe.

 It
enameled in the delicious tones of a robust and varied vegetation, its
winding through the meadows, its mountains covered with forests, its
creatures.
and marvelous, and we imagine that this Earth fills the universe, and
 The Sun, the Moon, the stars, the boundless Heavens,
illumine our days, and shed a gentle radiance upon our nights.
an agreeable illusion of our senses.
the other worlds of the Heavens, Venus, Mars, etc.
continue to gravitate in the Heavens along with our defunct planet, and
created) would not even be perceived by those other worlds, that
 There would be no revolution, no
 The stars would go on shining in the firmament, just as they
Heavens.

worlds and suns that people the universe.


rays to the sky, which is dazzling with his splendor.
space, reaches a culminating point at noon, and then descends toward the

And then the stars, grand lighthouses of the Heavens, in their turn
 They too rise in the East, ascend the vault of Heaven, and
 All the orbs, Sun, Moon, planets,

This journey of the orbs around us is only an illusion of the senses.

movement round her, or whether, on the contrary, the stars are fixed,
same.
motion--the seas, the atmosphere, the clouds, and ourselves,--we are
their respective positions among themselves.
logic, and reason out the two hypotheses.

the Earth, it would be necessary that all the orbs of the sky should be
supposed.
 The peoples of antiquity had no

measured, according to Hesiod, by Vulcan's anvil, which fell from the
taken as long again to continue its journey from the surface of the

To-day we have a more exact notion of the grandeur of the Universe.
know that millions and trillions of miles separate the stars from one
 And by representing these distances, we can form some idea of
round the Earth.

miles).
would have to fly through Space at a velocity of more than 10,000

Yes! the Sun, splendid orb, source of our existence and of that of all
the Earth, and 324 thousand times heavier, would have to accomplish this
lilliputian world!
This in itself would suffice to convince us of the want of logic in such
 But the Sun is not alone in the Heavens.
suppose that all the planets and all the stars were engaged in the same

Jupiter is about five times as far off as the Sun; his velocity would

Neptune, thirty times farther off, would have to execute 320,000

The nearest star, [alpha] of the Centaur, situated at a distance 275,000
rate of 2,941,000,000 kilometers (1,823,420,000 miles) per second.


And this fantastic rotation would all be accomplished round a minute

 Unless we deny the
Earth's diurnal motion of rotation is a certainty.

author humorously suggests, that in order to roast a pheasant the
round it.

equator would simply travel at a rate of 465 meters (1,525 feet) per
 This speed, while considerable in comparison with the movements
the fantastic rapidity at which the Sun and stars would have to move, in

Thus we have to choose between these two hypotheses: either to make the
globe to be animated by a motion of rotation upon itself.
impression is the same, and as we are insensible to the motion of the
 So that, in last
simple common sense.
 Moreover, all the
twenty-four hours, and its movement of revolution round the Sun in a
discovered for our wandering planet.

planet.
years ago, and the ancient authors quote among others Nicetas of
the doctrine of the Earth's movement.
had any idea of the real distances of the stars, and the argument did
 Ptolemy, after a long
his principal reason that if the Earth turned, the objects that were not
that a body shot into the air would fall back to the West of its
 This
objects fixed to the soil, but also the atmosphere, and the clouds that
 The
are adherent to it and make one body with it, participating in its
train, or the car of an aerostat.
out of such a car, this object, animated with the acquired velocity,
though it were gliding along a thread.
experiment more than once in aerial journeys.

 But

1.
and swollen at the equator, has been produced by the rotary motion, by

2.
equator, objects lose a little of their weight in proportion as they are
_nil_.

 In virtue of this same centrifugal force, the length of the pendulum
is one of 3 millimeters.

 A weight abandoned to itself and falling from a certain height,
 Experiment,
plumb-line that marks the vertical.
the Pantheon during the recent experiments.

 The magnificent experiment of Foucault at the Pantheon, just renewed
the rotary motion of the Earth to all beholders.
ball (28 kilograms, about 60 pounds) is suspended from the dome of the
 When the pendulum is in
upon two little heaps of sand arranged some yards away from the center.
At each oscillation this point cuts the sand, and the furrow gets
of the pendulum.
Earth revolves beneath, from West to East.
this experiment is that the plane in which any pendulum is made to
turned.
turning under our feet.

Earth's motion round the Sun.
that are least remote from our solar province appear to describe minute
 These small apparent
rotation of the Earth round the Sun, in perspective.

but the proofs just given are sufficiently convincing to leave no doubt

Nor are these two the only motions by which our globe is rocked in
 To its diurnal rotation and its annual rotation we may add
themselves in thousands of years, others, more rapid, being constantly
 It is, however, impossible in these restricted pages to enter
 We must not forget
knowledge as simply as possible, and to offer our readers only the "best
"
       *       *       *       *       *
The two principal motions of which we have just spoken give us the
days.

presents all its parts in succession to the Sun fixed in space.
Illuminated countries have the day, those opposite, in the shadow of the
 The countries carried by the Earth toward
 Those
are just opposite have midnight.

has been divided arbitrarily into twenty-four periods called hours; each

In consequence, each country turns in twenty-four hours round the axis
 The difference in hours between the different regions of
position.
gets there after it has shone upon our meridian.
Paris, it is only 11.
M.
36 A.
 in Madrid; 11.
M.
at Lisbon; 11.
M.
06 A.
 at Quebec; 6.
M.
York; 5.
M.
 The countries situated to the East
 When it is noon in Paris, it is
25 P.
 at Athens; 2.
P.
 at Moscow; 3.
M.
42 P.
 at Bombay; and so on.
are here speaking of real times, and not of the conventional times.

 60.
]
If we could make the tour of the world in twenty-four hours, starting
with the Sun, we should have him always over our heads.
round the world from West to East, one goes in front of the Sun, and
one loses a day.

twenty-three hours, fifty-six minutes, four seconds.
sidereal day.
its orbit, and at the end of a diurnal rotation it is still obliged to
the same meridian to the fixed Sun which, in consequence of the rotary
 The solar day is thus one of
 There are 366 rotations in the year.

 In
is tipped or inclined a certain quantity: 23° 27'.

remains the same.
 The
the solar illumination have the longer days, those which have a smaller
 At the equator there is constantly, and all

[Illustration: FIG.
--Inclination of the Earth.

cover the corresponding hemisphere with their light.
this same hemisphere is in winter, and the opposite hemisphere is in its
 June 21 is the summer solstice for the
pole.
southern hemisphere is completely exposed to the Sun.
epochs, when the radiant orb shines exactly upon the equator, that is on
when all nature is enchanting and enchanted; on September 21 we have the

The terrestrial sphere has been divided into different zones, with which

 The tropical zone, which extends 23° 27' from one part to the other
 This is the hottest region.
of the tropics.

 The temperate zones, which extend from 23° 27' to 66° 23' of

3.
the Sun remains constantly above or below the horizon for several days,
 These glacial zones are limited by the polar

We must add that the _axis_ of the Earth is a straight line that is
diametrically opposite points called the _poles_.
of the Earth is effected round this axis.

poles, at equal distance, which divides the globe into two hemispheres.
The equator is divided into 360 parts or degrees, by other circles that
 These are the _longitudes_ or meridians
 62).
into larger or smaller circles, which have received the name of
the equator, in the direction of the North and South poles,
 The longitudes are reckoned from some point either to East

passing from North to South of any spot, it is the latitude that alters.

 62.
 Longitudes and
]
The circles of latitude are smaller in proportion as one approaches the
 The circumference of the world is 40,076,600 meters at the
 At the latitude of Paris (48° 50') it is only 26,431,900
 A point situated at the equator has more ground to travel over
nearer the pole.

second at the equator.
meters.

The longitudes, or meridians, are great circles of equal length,
melon.
(40,008,032) meters.
meter has been determined as, by definition, the ten-millionth part of

Thus, while rotating upon itself, the Earth spins round the Sun, along a
central focus, a sensibly elliptical orbit, as we have already pointed
 It is a little nearer the Sun on January 1st than on July 1st, at
(_apo_, far, _helios_, Sun).
(3,720,000 miles), and its velocity is a little greater at perihelion

This second motion produces the _year_.
hundred and sixty-five days, six hours, nine minutes, nine seconds.
Such is the complete revolution of our planet round the orb of day.
has received the name of sidereal year.
the year in practical life.
year, is not equivalent to the Earth's revolution, because a very slow
which occupies 25,765 years, drags the spring equinox back some twenty

The civil year is, accordingly, three hundred and sixty-five days, five

In order to simplify the calendar, this accumulating fraction of five
added every four years to a bissextile year (leap-year), and thus we
sixty-six days.
leap-year.
eleven minutes, fourteen seconds.
years by not taking as bissextile those secular years of which the
 The year 1600 was leap-year: 1700,
 The agreement between the
establishment of the Gregorian Calendar in 1582.

kilometers (576,600,000 miles), which must be traversed in a year, the
day, or 106,000 kilometers (65,720 miles) an hour, or 29,500 meters (18
slower at aphelion.
the speed of an express-train, is effected without commotion, shock, or
 Reasoning alone enables us to divine the prodigious movement that

Returning to the calendar, it must be remarked in conclusion, that the
January 1.
 And
which in the time of Romulus began with March, the "seventh" month,
November (the ninth) has become the eleventh; and December (the tenth)
 Verily, we are not hard to please!
These months, again, are unequal, as every one knows.
simple expedient of remembering the long and short months, by closing
corresponding to the long months, the latter to the short: first knob =
[12]
[Illustration: FIG.
--To find the long and short months.

Nature, with the spring on the terrestrial hemisphere occupied by the
months be equalized, and their names modified? Why should we not follow
planet? But our poor Earth may roll on a long time yet before its





It is the delightful hour when all Nature pauses in the tranquil calm of

The Sun has cast his farewell gleams upon the weary Earth.
hushed.
somber firmament.
rises slowly, as it were calling our thoughts toward the mysteries of
Heaven.

seeming to stretch their knotted arms toward this celestial beauty.
the river, smooth as a mirror, wherein the pale Phoebe reflects her
spouse.
that hides her from their eyes, and pours the reflection of her gentle

From all time the Moon has had the privilege of charming the gaze, and
 What thoughts have not
solitude, brooding over our silent nights, this celestial luminary is at
a reverie full of charm and melancholy.
destinies, her nocturnal flame watches over our planet, following it in

The human eye first uplifted to the Heavens was struck, above all, with
 The
the first astronomical observations were limited to the study of her

Daughter of the Earth, the Moon was born at the limits of the
sphere, and was detached from her at some critical period of colossal
 Separating with regret from her cradle, but attached to the
month, from west to east, and this movement keeps her back a little each
 If we watch, evening by evening, beginning
farther to the left, or east, than on the preceding evening.
revolution of the Moon around our planet produces the phases, and gives

[Illustration: FIG.
--The Full Moon slowly rises.

 One
prevented her from turning.
of a human face that has been observed through all the ages.

Heavens, the more so as the principal spots of her disk vaguely recall
 If we try to draw it without the aid of
interprets in his own fashion.
Moon has the appearance represented in the following figure.
resemble two eyes and the sketch of a nose; resulting in a vague human
 Others see a man carrying a
embracing, etc.
human figure in it.

of a man's head fairly well sketched, and furnished with an abundant
 66).
woman's head that is certainly too definite, like this of M.
(Fig.
 Others, again, like M.
the likeness of a young girl being embraced by him (Fig.
 There is
 And yet, on the first suitable
first quarter, and you will not fail to see the masculine profile just
"
[Illustration: FIG.
--The Moon viewed with the unaided eye.

 66.
]
These vague aspects disappear as soon as the Moon is examined with even
illusions of indistinct vision vanish.
the Moon, taken by the author some years ago (Fig.
a human figure, man, dog, hare, nor faggot; simply deep geographical
light bands spread out, some being prolonged to a considerable distance.
And yet, from a little way off, does it not form the man's face above

 67.
]
From the earliest astronomical observations made with the aid of
spots could represent, and they were called seas, because water absorbs
 The Moon of itself
by the light of the Sun that illuminates it.
Earth, and constantly changes its position with respect to the Sun, we
phases that every one knows so well.

 68.
]
[Illustration: FIG.
--Photograph of the Moon.

the Earth, and its non-illuminated hemisphere is turned toward us.
is the New Moon, invisible to us; but two days later, the slim crescent
 Gradually the crescent
 When the Moon arrives at right angles with ourselves and with
 This is the
 At the time of Full Moon, it is opposite the Sun, and we
 Then comes the decline: the
day, and about a week before the New Moon our fair friend only shows her
last quarter.

 70.
]
When the Moon is crescent, in the first evenings of the lunation, and
feebly by a pale luminosity.
 It is due
into space.
back to us by the Moon.

This rotation of the Moon round the Earth is accomplished in
as the Earth is simultaneously revolving round the Sun, when the Moon
to the Sun), the Moon has to travel two days longer to recover its
longer than the sidereal revolution of the Moon, and takes twenty-nine
 This is the

This revolution is accomplished at a distance of 384,000 kilometers
 The velocity of the Moon in its orbit is more than 1
6214 mile) per second.
space at a velocity almost thirty times greater.

e.
3,480 kilometers (2,157 miles).

little more than the thirteenth part of the terrestrial surface, which

In volume, the Moon is fifty times less than the Earth.
weight is only 1/81 that of the terrestrial globe.
615,
e.
that of water.
174.
transported thither would only weigh 174 grams.


separates us from it (about thirty times the diameter of the Earth), the
 What does this small

A telegraphic message would get there in one and a half second; a
express-train would be due in eight months, twenty-two days.
the 1/388 part of the distance that separates us from the Sun, and only
 Many
 A bridge

Owing to this great proximity, the Moon is the best known of all the
 Its geographical (or more correctly,
centuries ago, at first in a vague sketch, and afterward with more
terrestrial maps of geography.

century, people lost themselves in conjectures as to the nature of this
 It was held to be a mysterious world, the more
 Some

wealth and happiness.
quite irrationally, that the inhabitants of the Moon were fifteen times

The invention of telescopes, however, brought a little order and a grain
 The first observations of
best-ordered minds with enthusiasm.
property, a terrestrial suburb, where the whole world would gladly have
wings of the imagination.
enchanting descriptions of the charms of our fair sister, and no one
 Soon, it was observed that the Moon closely resembled
mountain peaks that light up in so many luminous points beneath the rays
 Alongside, dark and shaded parts indicate the plains;
because they reflect the solar light less perfectly than the adjacent
 At that epoch hardly anything was known of the physical
atmospheric layer, analogous to that at the bottom of which we carry on

To-day we know that these "seas" are destitute of water, and that if the

The Moon became the favorite object of astronomers, and the numerous
selenographic charts.
and mountains that make up the lunar territory, it was necessary to name
 The seas were the first to be baptized, in accordance with their
 Accordingly, we find on the Moon, the
Tempests, the Sea of Tranquillity, the Marsh of Mists, the Lake of
Rains, etc.

proposed to call them after the most illustrious astronomers, but the
authors of the first lunar maps (1647, 1651), and they judged it more

found up there; then, as the vocabulary of the mountains was not
Moon, Aristotle, Plato, Hipparchus, Ptolemy, Copernicus, Kepler, Newton,

We have not space to reproduce the general chart of the Moon (that
nomenclature); but the figure subjoined gives a summary sufficient for
 Here are the names of the principal

[Illustration: FIG.
--Map of the Moon.

")
           1 Furnerius
           3 Langrenus
           5 Cleomedes
           7 Altas
           9 Romer
          11 Fracastorius
          13 Piccolomini
          15 Hipparchus
          17 Eudoxus
          19 Cassini
          21 Plato
          23 Eratosthenes
          25 Ptolemy
          27 Arzachel
          29 Clavius
          31 Bullialdus
          33 Schickard
          35 Kepler
          37 Aristarchus
          A Mare Crisum
          C Mare Nectaris
          E Mare Serenitatis
          G Sinus Iridum
          I Mare Humorum
          V Altai Mountains
          X Apennine Mountains
          Z Alps]
The constantly growing progress of optics leads to perpetual new
the geography of the Moon as well as, and even better than, that of our
 The heights of all the mountains of the Moon are measured to
 (One cannot say as much for the mountains of the
) The highest are over 7,000 meters (nearly 25,000 feet).
Relatively to its proportions, the satellite is much more mountainous
than here.
Himalayas and of the whole Earth, whose elevation of 8,840 meters
are peaks on the Moon of 7,700 meters (25,264 feet), _e.
_, those of
lunar diameter.

 It is visible
shining like a kind of star upon the lower portion of the disk.
time of full moon it is dazzling, and projects long rays from afar upon
 So, too, Mount Copernicus, whose brilliant whiteness
 But the strangest thing about these lunar mountains
height.
water! In effect, these mountains of the moon are ancient volcanic

At the top of the highest peaks, there is a large circular depression,
of the surrounding plains, and as these craters often measure several
them in crossing the mountain, to descend almost perpendicularly into
the plain.
perilous ascents!
No country on the Earth can give us any notion of the state of the lunar
to its very bowels.
tumbled one upon the other, and round the awful labyrinth of craters one
cathedral spires issuing from the chaos.

of the valleys that it is imperceptible.
snow.
by day as by night.

the lunar day is fifteen times longer than our own, because the Sun
less than 354 hours from the rising to the setting of the Sun.
arrive before the sunrise, there is no aurora to herald it, for in the
 Of a sudden on
of the mountains, while the plains and valleys are still in darkness.
The light spreads slowly, for while on the Earth in central latitudes
takes nearly an hour, and in consequence the light it sends out is very
 It is a kind of
hour, the solar disk has half risen, the light appears as intense to the
with its protuberances and its burning atmosphere.
a luminous god, in the depths of the black sky, a profound and formless
atmospheric veil such as conceals them from us during the daylight.

 72.
]
The absence of sensible atmosphere must produce an effect on the
mountains of our globe, where the rarefaction of the air does not permit
does below the atmosphere, which acts as a forcing-house: the Sun's heat

only during the nights, which are fifteen times longer than our own, but

We give two different drawings to represent these curious aspects of
 The first (Fig.
the Apennines, and shows a long chain of mountains beneath which are
(Fig.
constructed of dismantled ramparts, and whose depths are sprinkled with
 The first of these two drawings was made in England by
of what one sees in the telescope with different modes of solar

In the Moon's always black and starry sky a majestic star that is not
stationary in the Heavens, while all the others pass behind it, may
considerable apparent magnitude.
the Moon in diameter, and thirteen to fourteen times more extensive in
similar to those which our satellite presents to us, but in the inverse
 At the moment of New Moon, the Sun fully illuminates the
Earth"; at the time of Full Moon, on the contrary, the non-illuminated
Earth": when the Moon shows us first quarter, the Earth is in last
 The drawing subjoined gives an idea of these

[Illustration: FIG.
--Flammarion's Lunar Ring.

fourteen times twenty-four hours! Independent of its phases, which bring
from full earth to last quarter for sunrise, how interested we should be
twenty-four hours.

 74.
]
Yes, thanks to us, the inhabitants of the lunar hemisphere turned toward
less white than our own despite the clouds with which the terrestrial

unparalleled beauty, and we may say without false modesty that our
fairy-like effects.

radiates through space; they see its greenish clarity varying with the
motion of rotation, by which all the countries of our planet are

We are talking of these pageants seen from the Moon, and of the
 The sterile and
conclusion that such inhabitants are non-existent, although we have no
 That they have existed seems to me
 The lunar volcanoes had a considerable activity, in an
way by the winds, figuring round the craters the stellar rays that are
 These cinders were spread over the soil, preserving
they were impelled.
Paris Observatory by MM.
these projections.
and gases on the surface of the lunar globe, which appear subsequently
 Now the teaching of our own planet is
is a law so general and so imperious that life develops at its own
 Accordingly, it is
when only next door they exhibited such fecundity upon our globe.
the Moon has been inhabited by beings doubtless very different from
the phases of its astral life more rapidly than our own, and the

The duration of the life of the worlds appears to have been in
 The Moon cooled and mineralized more
 Jupiter is still fluid.

province.

kilometers (some 120 miles) from our eye.
more, either from the most powerful instruments, or from photographic
 Sometimes, exceptionally, enlargements of 3,000 can be
 This = 384000/3000 or 128 kilometers (some 80 miles).
this is an admirable result, which does the greatest honor to human
 But it is still too far to enable us to determine anything

Any one who likes to be impressed by grand and magnificent sights may
first quarter, when the relief of its surface, illuminated obliquely by
 If you examine our neighbor world at
its brilliancy and beauty.
give the image of a jewel of shining silver, translucent, fluid,
 Nothing could be more beautiful, nothing
of space, and sending back to us as in some fairy dream the solar
 But yesterday I received the same
progress of the Sun as it mounted the lunar horizon to touch these
 And I reflected that it is indeed inconceivable that
lives without ever having attended to this pageant, nor to any of those
wondering gaze of the observers of the Heavens.


CHAPTER X
THE ECLIPSES

during our contemplation of the universe, one of the most magnificent

The hirsute comets, and shooting stars with their graceful flight,
 We
firmament, to rest upon the brilliant, golden trail they leave behind
 These unknown travelers bring a message from eternity; they tell
 Children of space, their ethereal

The eclipses, on the other hand, are phenomena that touch us more

In treating of them, we remain between the Earth and the Moon, in our
movements of our satellite around us.


rays.
dazzling light.
influence generally upon the world.

 The luminous disk of the Sun is
 Another disk, as black as ink, creeps in front of
 The atmosphere takes on a
immense veil of sadness spreads over the world.
and the stars shine out in the Heavens.
mysterious cataclysm the Sun had disappeared forever.
tribulation is soon over.
 A flaming jet
see that he has lost nothing in splendor or beauty.
radiant Apollo, King of Day, watching over the life of the planetary

This sudden night, darkening the Heavens in the midst of a fine day, can
phenomenon.

impression upon our minds, and indeed to inspire anxious spirits with
nothing supernatural or formidable about it.


hand throwing the somber veil of night over the celestial torch?
Had not the Earth strayed off her appointed path, and were we not all to
dragon perhaps preparing to devour the orb of day?
The fable of the dragon devouring the Sun or Moon during the eclipses is
than one latitude.
terrible celestial dragon with our gentle friend the Moon, who would not

We saw in the preceding lesson that the Moon revolves round us,
month.
between the Sun and the Earth, sometimes behind us, sometimes at a right
 Now, the eclipses of the Sun
between the Sun and ourselves, and the eclipses of the Moon, at the
us.

causes to which eclipses are due.

the Earth, may conceal a greater or lesser portion of the orb of day.
this case there is an eclipse of the Sun.
on the other side of the Earth in relation to the Sun, at the moment of
from reaching our satellite.
Earth_, and is then eclipsed.
phenomenon.
and an eclipse of the Moon at each Full Moon?
If the Moon revolved round us in the same plane as the Earth round the
eclipsed in our shadow at each Full Moon.
orbit dips a little upon the plane of the terrestrial orbit, and the
at the line of intersection of these two planes, _i.
_, when the Sun,
 In the majority
sovereign of our system, our satellite passes a little above or a little
little above or below the cone of shadow that accompanies our planet,

When the Moon intervenes directly in front of the Sun, she arrests the
solar disk.
the Sun; total if she covers it entirely; annular, if the solar disk is
elliptical orbit, is beyond medium distance, toward the apogee.

shadow that the Earth projects behind it, it is her turn to be eclipsed.
She no longer receives the rays of the Sun, and this deprivation is the
of day.
the cone of shadow.
 But if a portion
the light of the other dies out.
eclipse, and the rounded form of the Earth's shadow can be seen
nature of our globe.

rays of the Sun, by concealing the orb of day, and in other cases is
 Despite the fables, fears, and
Moon is only playing hide-and-seek with us--a very harmless amusement,

But as we said just now, these phenomena formerly had the power of
seemed on the verge of extinction, or when the beautiful Phoebus was

It would take a volume to describe all the notable events which have
disastrous consequences.
be devoid of interest; it would illustrate the possibilities of
culture and scientific study.

Cyaxarus, King of the Medes, revenged themselves by serving up the limbs
game.
the Court of the King of Lydia, who was ill judged enough to protect
 War was accordingly declared between the Medes and Lydians, but a
had the happy effect of disarming the combatants, who prudently retired
 This eclipse, which seems to have occurred on
C.
 The French painter
 75).

C.
Greece after an expedition to Sicily.
the Moon, and fearing the malign influence of the phenomenon, he put off
 This superstition cost
 The Greek army was destroyed, and this event marks the

In 331 B.
 an eclipse of the Moon disorganized the troops of Alexander,
address to reassure his panic-stricken soldiers.

of this city, had the good fortune to escape, but was disturbed on the
which alarmed his companions.
spreading his cloak in front of the Sun.
(This eclipse seems to be that of August 15, 309, rather than that of
)
[Illustration: FIG.
--Battle between the Medes and Lydians arrested
]
On June 29, 1033, an epoch at which the approaching end of the world
about midday frustrated the designs of a band of conspirators who
 This Pope was Benedict IX, a
but exemplary.
dared not touch the Pontiff, and he reigned till 1044.

Columbus.
the contumacious savages refused to give him provisions.
the arrival of this eclipse by the astronomical almanacs, he threatened
 The
his feet, and brought him all that he required.

superstitions connected with eclipses.
Moon's light is regarded as a sign of divine anger: the humble penitents
 There, the
cries and threats, and the sky is bombarded with shots to deliver the

In France the announcement of a solar eclipse for August 21, 1560, so

threatened Humanity with deadly consequences! The unhappy eclipse had
revolution in the provinces and in Rome, others predicted a new
the most optimistic thought the air would be contaminated.
themselves from so many dangers, and in accordance with the physicians'
closed and perfumed cellars, where they awaited the decrees of Fate.
approach of the phenomenon increased the panic, and it is said that one
who wanted to discharge their souls of sin before taking flight for a
eclipse had been put off a fortnight on account of the number of

 76.
1877).

 In the
indescribable panic among the inhabitants of Laos (Indo-China).
to frighten off the Black Dragon, the natives fired shots at the
yells.
 Harmand has memorialized the scene in the lively sketch given
 269.

among the Turks, who for the moment forgot their preparations for war
toils of the Dragon.

(Russian Turkestan), where it was received with a terrific din of
again by willing hands that sought to deliver the Moon from the demon

In China, eclipses are the object of imposing ceremonies, whose object
 Since the
sort be a reflection of the immutable order of the sidereal harmonies.
As eclipses were regarded by astrologers as disturbances of the divine
the Celestial Empire.
expiatory ceremonies prescribed thousands of years ago, and still in

In the twentieth century, as in the nineteenth, the eighteenth, or in
populations who abound upon the surface of our planet.


We said above that these phenomena were produced when the Full Moon and
nodes, when the plane of the lunar orbit cuts the plane of the ecliptic.
As this line turns and comes back in the same direction relatively to
register the eclipses observed during this period in order to know all

and the Chaldeans employed it three thousand years ago under the name of

On examining this cycle, composed of 223 lunations, we see that there
 When

The totality of a solar eclipse can not last more than seven minutes,
latitude of Paris.
for nearly two hours.

 Thus not one
which happened exactly above the capital of France having been on May
 I have calculated all those for the twentieth century, and
eighteen minutes past noon (total for Choisy-le-Roi, Longjumeau, and
28
M.
 Quentin, fairly long:
 Paris itself will not be favored before
 In order to witness the phenomenon, one must go and
 This the author did on May 28, 1900, in Spain.

beforehand on maps that serve to show the favored countries for which
 The above figure shows
Spain, Algeria, and Tunis.

 77.
]
The immutable splendor of the celestial motions had never struck the
phenomenon.
our satellite, gravitating round the Earth, arrived upon the theoretical
gradually, slowly, and exactly, in front of it.
and occurred at the moment predicted by calculation.
globe of the Moon pursued its regular course, discovered the radiant orb

impression: that of the greatness, the omnipotence of the inexorable
man, of this thinking atom straying upon another atom, who by the
laws by which he, like the rest of the world, is borne away through

The line of centrality passed through Elche, a picturesque city of
our station on account of the probability of fine weather.

transformed into an observatory by our learned friend, Count de la Baume
sky or landscape.
 In front was a town
off, the blue sea beyond the shores of Alicante and Murcia: on the
 A
many curious visitors, of whom over ten thousand had arrived.

disk was observed in the telescope, we fired a gun, in order to announce
were awaiting the phenomenon, and to discover what difference would
unaided eyes (protected simply by a bit of smoked glass) of so many
 This had already been done by Arago at Perpignan
 The verification was almost immediate for the majority of eyes,
 So that the commencement
astronomical instruments.


 It is only
lunar disk that the phenomenon is imposing in its grandeur.
phase, I called the attention of the people standing in the court to the
asked if any with long sight could perceive her.
responded in the affirmative.
that time at its period of maximum brilliancy, when for observers

When some three-quarters of the Sun were eclipsed, the pigeons which had
movement.
little later, returning to the hen-house as though it had been night,
population is certainly not diminishing) left off their games, and came
 The birds flew anxiously to their nests.
The ants in one garden were excessively agitated, no doubt disconcerted
 The bats came out.

part of Spain for the observation of the phenomenon by the following

magnificent and imposing that it is possible to see in nature.
exact moment indicated by calculation, the Moon arrives in front of the
 The light
 A sense of oppression is felt by
the chickens hide beneath their mother's wing, the wind drops, the
though the universe were on the verge of some imminent catastrophe.
Men's faces assume a cadaverous hue similar to that given at night by
sinister illumination of the world's last hour.

see, instead of the Sun, a black disk surrounded with a splendid
burning at the base.

brightest of the stars are visible in the Heavens.
splendid, grandiose, solemn, and sublime.

following notes, written in my schedule of observation during the event,

50 P.
 Light very weak, sky leaden gray, mountains standing out with

"3.
M.
 Cold wind blowing through

"3.
M.
in the celestial phenomenon.

"3.
M.
sinister.
 This diminution of
 There is, as it were, a
 One becomes accustomed
is a natural phenomenon, we can not escape a certain sense of
 The approach of some extraordinary spectacle is imminent.

colors of the spectrum.
the tonality of the light of the eclipse, I had prepared seven great
indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange, red; and a similar series in pieces
 These colors were laid at our feet upon the terrace where my
 We then
a few seconds, in the following order: violet, indigo, blue, green.
three other colors were considerably attenuated by the darkness, but

It should be noted that in the normal order of things--that is, every

This experiment shows that the last light emitted by the eclipsed Sun
the slowest vibrations, to the yellow and red rays.
the predominating color of the solar atmosphere.

 Magical and splendid
disk of the Moon covers it entirely, leaving all round it a magnificent
 One would suppose it to be an annular eclipse,
without fatigue to the retina, and drawn quietly.

pretty equal depth, equivalent to about the third of half the solar
 It may be regarded as the Sun's atmosphere.

which sends out long plumes, principally in the direction of the
prominences.

 Below it is double,
shines like a dazzling star of first magnitude, and seems placed there

I draw these various aspects (which, moreover, change with the movement
between this aureole and the coronal atmosphere; the latter appears to
dense.

different nature_, the corona belonging to the globe of the Sun, and
formed of particles that circulate independently round it, probably
electric or magnetic forces, counterbalanced by resistances of various
 In our own atmosphere the volcanic eruptions are distinct from

The general configuration of this external halo, spreading more
eclipse of 1889, published in my _Popular Astronomy_, which also
 The year 1900 is in fact
 This equatorial form

[Illustration: FIG.
--Total eclipse of the Sun, May 28, 1900, as
]
There can no longer be the slightest doubt that the solar envelope
.
.

write these lines.
 A
orbit has left it.
 It has gone like a

"Already over! It is almost a disillusion.
this world.
two, three, or four minutes! It was too short.
.

"Alas! we are forced to take things as they are.

are over.
resumes its momentarily suspended course.

 l'Abbé Moreux, my colleague from the
observation, was taking one of his own, without any reciprocal
 These two sketches are alike, and confirmatory.

freely, and protected from reflection from the ground, were read every
 The black thermometer went down from 33.
7°, that
4°; the white from 29° to 20.
8°.
the shade only varied three degrees.

envelope of the Sun; second, to that of the terrestrial atmosphere,
the other of the line of centrality.
of the Full Moon, on account of the almost sudden transition.
reality, it was more intense, for only first-magnitude stars were
and even of third magnitude are visible.
Venus, Mercury, Sirius, Procyon, Capella, Rigel, Betelgeuse.


contemplation of a total eclipse of the Sun is one of the most marvelous

Some persons assured me that they saw the shadow of the Moon flying
 My attention was otherwise occupied, and I
 The shadow of the
47 P.
 to 3.
M.
traverse the Iberian Peninsula from Porto to Alicante, _i.
_, a
 It must therefore have passed
1,150 meters per second, a speed higher than that of a bullet.
easily be watched from afar, on the mountains.

of the belt along which it could be observed, I had invited them to note
produced by the eclipse upon animals.
nests, swallows lost themselves, sheep huddled into compact packs,
took refuge in the hen-house, and cocks crowed, bats came out, and were
cage-birds ceased their songs, some dogs howled, others crept shivering
chirped as at sunset, pigeons sank to the ground, a swarm of bees went

These creatures behaved as though the night had come, but there were
from those manifested during the grandiose phenomenon of a total

At Madrid the eclipse was only partial.
XIII, took care to photograph it, and I offer the photograph to my
 79), as this amiable sovereign did me the honor to give it

[Illustration: FIG.
--The Eclipse of May 28, 1900, as photographed by
]
The technical results of these observations of solar eclipses relate
constitution of the Sun.
this orb.
science.

eclipses of the Sun.
account, and it may be said to vary for each eclipse.

Earth's cone of shadow; the solar rays are refracted round our globe by
tint that reminds one of the sunset.
does not occur, owing doubtless to lack of transparency in the
 This happened recently, on

For any spot, eclipses of the Moon are incomparably more frequent than
solar eclipses is not very broad at its contact with the surface of the
Moon), whereas all the countries of the Earth for which the Moon is

the Heavens, and I strongly advise my readers on no account to forego






I will not do my readers the injustice to suppose that they will be
"method" in their own lives.
enough to take me on faith when I have spoken of the distances of the
Mars, they retain some curiosity as to how the astronomers solve these
 Hence it will be as interesting as it is useful to complete
acquiring these bold conclusions.

of twilight: an immense abyss separates us from it.
hand down the constellated sky; and yet one can not think of their

Our neighbor, Moon, floats in space, a stone's throw from us: but
impassable desert to us.

these distances of Sun and Moon are better determined and more precise
 Hence, it is of
in determining them.

" This
distances.
 If the word repels

When the distance of an object is unknown, the only means of expressing
before our eyes.

distance from us.
 It is
 Every object removed to a
whatever its real dimensions.
exactly 1 degree, if we see it at a distance of 57 meters.
measuring 1.
 8 in.
degree, if distant 57 times its height, that is to say, at 102.
meters.
70 meters,

In length, a degree is the 57th part of the radius of a circle, _i.
_,

The measurement of an angle is expressed in parts of the circumference.
Now, what is an angle of a degree? It is the 360th part of any
 On a table 3.
centimeter, seen from the center of the table.
a circle 0.

[Illustration: FIG.
--Measurement of Angles.

360 places, each measuring 0.
full a person placed at the center will see each spectator occupying an
 The angle does not alter with the distance, and
infinite spaces of Heaven, it is always the same angle.
be represented by a meter or a kilometer, it always remains a degree.
angles measuring less than a degree often have to be calculated, this
has been given, and each minute into 60 parts or _seconds_.
short, the degree is indicated by a little zero (°) placed above the

as employed for the division of the duration of time.
never to be written with the signs of abbreviation just indicated,
_e.
_, for an automobile race, 4h.
 18m.

This makes clear the distinction between the relative measure of an
 Thus,
of a degree) measured in the sky may correspond to millions of

Now the measure of the Moon's diameter gives us an angle of a little
 If it were exactly half a degree, we should

and the geometric ratio tells us that the distance of our satellite is

Hence we have very simply obtained a first idea of the distance of the
 Nothing could be simpler than this
 The first step is made.

This approximation tells us nothing as yet of the real distance of the
 In order to know this distance in miles, we need to know

[Illustration: FIG.
--Division of the Circumference into 360
]
This problem has been solved, as follows:
Two observers go as far as possible from each other, and observe the
but having a wide difference of latitude.
the two points of observation forms the base of a triangle, of which the

[Illustration: FIG.
--Measurement of the distance of the Moon.

established, in 1751 and 1752, by two French astronomers, Lalande and
Hope.
formed at the center of the lunar disk by the half-diameter of the Earth
 This is known as the

Here is a more or less alarming word; yet it is one that we can not
 This astronomical
where it will frequently recur, and always in connection with the
 "Do not let us fear," wrote Lalande
parallax, despite its scientific aspect; it is convenient, and this term
"
"If one is at the play," he continues, "behind a woman whose hat is too
ago!], one leans to the left or right, one rises or stoops: all this is
correspond with another part of the theater from that in which are the
" "It is thus," he adds, "that there may be an eclipse of the Sun
are high enough to prevent the Moon's hiding it from us.

 This parallax of 57 minutes proves that the Earth
half-diameter (precisely, 60.
 From this to the distance of the Moon
half-diameter of the Earth, which is 6,371 kilometers (3,950 miles) by
 The distance of our satellite, accordingly, is 6,371
27--that is, 384,000 kilometers (238,000
 The parallax of the Moon not only tells us definitely the
by the measure of its apparent volume.
from the Earth subtends an angle of 31', while that of the Earth seen
that of the terrestrial globe in the relation of 273 to 1,000.
little more than a quarter, or 3,480 kilometers (2,157 miles), the

This distance, calculated thus by geometry, is positively determined
of terrestrial distances, such as the length of a road, or of a railway.
This statement may seem to be a romance to many, but it is undeniable
greater care than, for instance, the length of the road from Paris to
 (And we
conscientious in their measurements than the most scrupulous
)
Had we conveyed ourselves to the Moon in order to determine its distance
precision, and we should, moreover, have had to plan out a journey

The Moon is at the frontier of our little terrestrial province: one
 And yet, a
the satellite.
of Heaven: for the Saturnians (if such exist!) the Earth and the Moon
the distance is beyond all to which we are accustomed.
however, to span it in thought.

would travel 8 days, 5 hours to reach the Moon.
speed of one kilometer per minute, would arrive at the end of an
16 hours.
Queen of Night, a telegraphic message would convey our news to the Moon

Long-distance travelers who have been round the world some dozen times

The other stars (beginning with the Sun) are incomparably farther from
 Yet it has been found possible to determine their distances, and

But it will at once be seen that different measures are required in
Moon, for from here to the orb of day is 12,000 times the breadth of our
 Here we must not think of erecting a triangle with the diameter
extremities of this diameter would come together between the Earth and
absurd.

we have recourse to the fine planet Venus, whose orbit is situated
 Owing to the combination of the Earth's
Venus passes in front of the Sun at the curious intervals of 8 years,

Thus there was a transit in June, 1761, then another 8 years after, in
 The next occurred 113-1/2 years less 8 years, _i.
_,
December, 1882.
 At these
across the Sun at two terrestrial stations as far as possible removed
their respective stations, appears to be projected at the same moment on
 This measure gives the width of an angle formed by two
Earth, cross upon Venus, and form an identical angle upon the Sun.
is thus at the apex of two equal triangles, the bases of which rest,
 The measurement of this
dimension at which the Earth would be seen at the distance of the Sun.

 83.
]
Thus, it has been found that the half-diameter of the Earth viewed from
82".
of one degree is at a distance of 57 times its length.

part of a degree, indicates by the measurement of its angle that it is
e.

Finally, an object that measures one second, or the sixtieth part of a

Hence we find that the Earth is at a distance from the Sun of
82--that is, 23,386 times its half-diameter, that is,
 This measurement again is as

I hope my readers will easily grasp this simple method of triangulation,
of the two great celestial torches to which we owe the radiant light of

The distance of the Sun has, moreover, been confirmed by other means,
 The two principal are
 The propagation of light is not
movements, a certain time is required for its transmission from one
 On the Earth, this velocity has been measured as
 To come from Jupiter to
distance of the planet.
satellites, it has been discovered that there is a difference of 16
Jupiter is on one side or on the other of the Sun, relatively to the
 If the light takes 16
than that time, or 8 minutes, 17 seconds, to come to us from the Sun,
 Knowing the velocity of light, the
17 seconds, or 497 seconds, which gives about 149,000,000 kilometers

Another method founded upon the velocity of light again gives a
 A familiar example will explain it: Let us imagine
umbrella will depend on the relation between our speed and that of the
 The more quickly we run, the more we need to dip our
 Now the same thing
 The stars, disseminated in space, shed floods of light
 If the Earth were motionless, the luminous rays would
 But our planet is spinning, racing, with the utmost
movements, and to incline our telescopes in the direction of its
 This phenomenon, known under the name of _aberration_ of light,
the Earth's motion.
to 1/10000 that of light, _i.
_, = about 30 kilometers (19 miles) per
 Our planet accordingly accomplishes her revolution round the Sun
29-1/2) per second, or 1,770 kilometers per minute, or 106,000
kilometers (586,569,600 miles) in the year.
elliptical path described by the Earth in her annual translation.

diameter, the half of which is exactly the distance of the Sun.

provided by the motions of our satellite.
in the regularity of her course round the Earth by the influence of the
 As the attraction varies inversely with the square of the
upon the Moon.

employed for determinations, confirm the precisions of these
 Our readers must forgive us for dwelling
measurement is of the highest importance; it serves as the base for the
of the universe.

at a distance of 149,000,000 kilometers (93,000,000 miles) from here.
Its vast brazier must indeed be powerful for its influence to be exerted
existence, and reaching out as far as Neptune, thirty times more remote

It is on account of its great distance that the Sun appears to us no
from here, and is itself illuminated by the brilliancy of this splendid

No terrestrial distance admits of our conceiving of this distance.
if we associate the idea of space with the idea of time, as we have
 The
minute, arrive at the Sun after an uninterrupted course of 283 years,

excursion before the bold travelers could bring back news of the

Sound is transmitted through the air at a velocity of 340 meters (1,115
 If our atmosphere reached to the Sun, the noise of an
at the end of 13 years, 9 months.
the telegraph, would leap across to the orb of day in 8 minutes, 17

Our imagination is confounded before this gulf of 93,000,000 miles,
through space in order to reach us.



We will leave aside the method of which we have been speaking; that now

It is obvious that the revolution of a planet round the Sun will be
to be traveled vaster.
 But the most curious thing is
duration of the revolutions of the planets and their distances.
proportion was discovered by Kepler, after thirty years of research,

(the periodic times) are proportional to the cubes of their mean
"
This is enough to alarm the boldest reader.
somewhat incomprehensible phrase, we are struck with its simplicity.

years old.
number multiplied by itself.


Four times 4 is 16; 16 is the square of 4.


Now, what is a cube? It is no more difficult.
twice by itself.

 So 8 is the
 3 × 3 × 3 = 27; 27 is the cube of 3, and so on.

of the formula enunciated above.
which.
 He is the Lord of our
 This colossal star is five times (precisely, 5.
far from us as the Sun.

2 × 5.
2 = 140.

(11.
 This number multiplied by itself also equals 140.
the number 11.
2.
simple law regulates all the heavenly bodies.

time of its revolution, then to discover the square of the given number
 The result of the operation gives

To express this distance in kilometers (or miles), it is sufficient to
of the world.

methods.
simplicity the immutable laws that preside over the immense harmony of

       *       *       *       *       *
But we must not confine ourselves to our own solar province.
to speak of the stars that reign in infinite space far beyond our

Strange and audacious as it may appear, the human mind is able to cross
and to plumb the depths of the abyss that separates us from these

Here, we return to our first method, that of triangulation.
distance that separates us from the Sun must serve in calculating the

The Earth, spinning round the Sun at a distance of 149,000,000
ellipse, of 936,000,000 kilometers (580,320,000 miles), which it travels
 The distance of any point of the terrestrial orbit from
298,000,000 kilometers (184,760,000 miles), _i.
_, the diameter of this
 This immense distance (in comparison with those with which we are

The difficulty in exact measurements of the distance of a star consists
see if this star is stationary, or if it describes a minute ellipse

If it remains fixed, it is lost in such depths of space that it is
meaning in view of such an abyss.
it will in the year describe a minute ellipse, which is only the
planet round the Sun.

radius, or half-diameter, of the terrestrial orbit from it.
of 149,000,000 kilometers (93,000,000 miles) is indeed, as previously
 The angle is of
apparent motion of the star diminishes in the same proportion.
stars are all so distant that their annual displacement of perspective
detection.

 84.
as a result of the annual displacement of the Earth.

for which the parallax is equal to that of another.
this angle, and the extraordinary difficulties experienced in measuring
value of a second is so small that the displacement of any star

A second of arc corresponds to the size of an object at a distance of
distance; to a hair, 1/10 of a millimeter in thickness, at 20 meters'
 And yet this value is in
 In fact:--the apparent displacement
75"), _i.
_,
orbit is reduced to this infinitesimal dimension.
length of any straight line seen from the front be reduced until it
75", it must be removed to
 As the radius of the terrestrial
separates [alpha] of Centaur from our world must therefore =
 And that is
 We saw in Chapter II that it shines in the southern
 The next, and one that can be seen in our latitudes, is 61
(42,000,000,000,000 miles) from here.
magnitude, was the first of which the distance was determined (by

All the rest are much more remote, and the procession is extended to

We can not conceive directly of such distances, and in order to imagine

In order to cover the distance that separates us from our neighbor,
years, 128 days.
finish, for that would not give us the faintest idea of the distance: we
light, and associate ourselves with its progress.
traverse 300,000 kilometers (186,000 miles) during the first second of
kilometers; then once more 300,000 kilometers during the third, and so
 If we take this
number surpasses all that we are in the habit of realizing, it will have

If some appalling explosion occurred in this star, and the sound in its
void that separates us from it, the noise of this explosion would only

A train started at a speed of 106 kilometers (65 miles) per hour would
neighbor in the celestial kingdom.

results are dubious.

(57,000,000,000,000 miles), the pale Vega at 204,000,000,000,000.
of these magnificent stars must be a huge sun to burn at such a distance
 Some are millions of times larger than the Earth.
Most of them are more voluminous than our Sun.
scintillate at inaccessible distances, and their light strays a long
 The luminous ray that we
enormous is its distance--may perhaps bring us the last emanation of a

       *       *       *       *       *
If these methods have been clear to my readers, they may also be

speaking.

oneself curiously what sort of balance the astronomers must have adopted

Here, figures replace weights.
it would be easier for some society dame to weigh the Sun at the point
than to weigh a 12 kilogram case of fruit, or a dress-basket of 35

Weighing the Sun is an amusement like any other, and a change of

If the Moon were not attracted by the Earth, she would glide through the
 But
Heavenly bodies, our satellite at a distance of 60 times the terrestrial
seconds, continually leaving the straight line to approach the Earth,
 If at any moment we
the deviation from the straight line caused by the attraction of our

This is the quantity by which the Moon drops toward us in each second,

On the other hand, no body can fall unless it be attracted, drawn by

Beings, animals, objects, adhere to the soil, and weigh upon the Earth,

Weight and universal attraction are one and the same force.

itself upon the surface of the Earth, it drops 4.
first second of its fall.

and that if we could raise a stone to the height of the Moon, and then
fall 4.
1-1/3 millimeters, exactly the quantity by which the Moon deviates from
her.


The distance of the Sun is 23,386 times the radius of the Earth.
order to know how much the intensity of terrestrial weight would be
the square of the number representing the distance--that is, 23,386
 If we divide 4.
represents the attractive force of our planet, by this number, we get
the Earth's attraction would really be almost _nil_.

 Let us trace
shall find that the Earth falls in each second 2.
the Sun.

that of the Earth, and proves that the Sun is 324,000 times more
9 millimeters divided by 0.
324,000, if worked out into the ultimate fractions neglected here for

A great number of stars have been weighed by the same method.

it is by this method that we are able to affirm that Jupiter is 310
14 times, while Mars is much less heavy, its weight being only

The planets which have no satellites have been weighed by the
comets that sometimes tarry in their vicinity.
less than the Earth (only 6/100) and Venus about 8/10.
star of the evening and morning is not so light as her name might imply,

As the Moon has no secondary body submitted to her influence, her weight
each tide in the ocean, or by observing the effects of her attraction on
 When the Moon is before us, in the last quarter,
behind, she delays us.

times less heavy than our planet.
weight between the Earth and the Moon as between an orange and a grape.


investigated the weight of the stars.
ascertain the quantity of matter which constitutes these distant

attractive influence of a sun upon some other contiguous neighboring

Of course this method can only be applied to those double stars of which

It has been discovered that some of the tiny stars that we can hardly
and heavier than our own, and millions of times more voluminous than the

Our planet is only a grain of dust floating in the immensity of Heaven.
Yet this atom of infinity is the cradle of an immense creation
centuries.

harmonious march obeys a mute order.
.

But we have as yet said nothing about weight on the surface of the
simple if unpoetical demonstration, they will certainly ask me for the
Jupiter or Mars would weigh more or less than here.

faith in the astronomers.

Jupiter, 310 times heavier than our own, weigh 310 times more.
would be a serious error.
kilogram transported to the surface of the Sun would there weigh 324,000
 That would be correct if these orbs
 But to speak, for instance,
little planet.

mass, but also on its diameter.

must argue as follows:
Since a body placed upon the surface of the Sun is 108 times farther
and since, on the other hand, attraction diminishes with the square of
by 108, or 11,700 times weaker.
mass, _i.
_, 324,000, by this number 11,700, and it results that bodies
 A woman whose
the same way as on the Earth, and would find walking very difficult, for
kilograms.

stars.
twice and a third times as great as here, while on Mars it only equals

On the surface of Mercury, weight is nearly twice as small again as
 On Neptune it is approximately equal to our own.

Moon: a man weighing 70 kilograms on the Earth would not weigh more than

So all tastes can be provided for: the only thing to be regretted is
residence upon the Earth.


CHAPTER XII
LIFE, UNIVERSAL AND ETERNAL

descriptive account of the marvels of the Cosmos, I must inquire what
celestial excursions to the other worlds? Are you left indifferent to
these distant stars, suns of the infinite, these innumerable stellar
existed there, what purpose was served by those dazzling spheres, what
reflect that the elements which upon our little Earth determined a vital
an incomparably vaster and more diversified existence throughout the
deserted, as we are tempted by the illusions of our terrestrial senses
contrary, the real aim of Astronomy, instead of ending with statements
penetrate to them, to make us divine, and know, and appreciate their
universal order?
On the Earth, it is Life and Thought that flourish; and it is Life and
Infinitude amid the immeasurable fields of Heaven.

brimming cup, overflowing at every outlet.
 From the
vegetation that carpets the soil, from the mold in the fields and woods,
murmur.
unknown and mysterious voices that are forever calling to us, from the
that are redundant everywhere, and make a lively community on the
 A drop of water contains thousands of curious and
 A grain of dust from the streets of Paris is the home
 If we turn over the soil of a garden, field, or
 If
 If we
a parasitic existence.
wood are peopled with nests, the birds sing, and chase each other at
antheaps and the molehills.
encroachment of which we are at once the heroes and the victims,
eternal reproduction.
which we build our houses are full of fossils so prodigiously multiplied
marvels of geometrical perfection.
infinitely great.

the result and the aim of the association of atoms.
for us upon the Earth, our only field of direct observation.
blind not to see this spectacle, deaf not to hear its reaching.
pretext could one suppose that our little globe which, as we have seen,
entire Universe, save for one insignificant isle, is devoted to vacancy,

other than terrestrial, and that the other worlds can only be inhabited
 But terrestrial nature
 We die in
 Again, short-sighted naturalists
1, because it is in complete darkness; 2, because the terrible pressure
there, and so on.
brings up lovely creatures, so delicate in structure that the daintiest
 There is no light in these
 Other inquirers
have been transformed by adaptation to their gloomy environment.

Sun of the Universe: "Thus far shalt thou come, and no further"? In the
 The Known is an infinitesimal
 The deep seas
life.
oxygen: oxygen is indispensable: a world without oxygen would be a
 Why? Because we have not
oxygen? Another mistake.
prove that they do not exist.
_anærobia_.
 Better still:

spectacle of terrestrial life, and the positive facts acquired by
judgments, and not limit extra-terrestrial existence to the servile
 Terrestrial organic forms are
 The chemical constitution of water
elements that have gone to form our bodies.
carbon, nitrogen, hydrogen, and oxygen combined in the state of water,
(salt).



who eats the beef.
combined in variable proportions with hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, etc.

which carbon is absent.
carbon, silicic acid carbonic acid, might be inhabited by organisms
only in form, but also in substance.
which spectral analysis reveals a predominance of silica, _e.
_, Rigel
 In a world where chlorine predominated, we might expect to
an important part in the phenomena of life.
associated in other formations? Why, indeed, should we draw the line at
simple? May not hydrogen, carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, and sulphur all be
16.
molecule composed of atoms, and may there not exist a single species of
might constitute the molecules of the so-called simple elements?
In our own solar system we discover the essential differences between
 In the spectrum of Jupiter, for instance, we are aware
absorption of certain red rays.
Earth, is seen still more obviously in the atmospheres of Saturn and
 Indeed, upon this last planet the atmosphere appears, apart from
 And in the
with terrestrial substances.

they are all children of the same parent.
themselves, not merely in respect of situation, position, volume, mass,
constitution.
should not be regarded as an obstacle to the manifestations of life,
the universal mother.

Mars, Jupiter, or Saturn, but still more toward the myriads of unknown
plausible reason for imagining that the inhabitants of these other
organic substance.

our planet, and notably to carbon.
from the ancestral animal forms to which it has gradually raised itself
 To us it
lungs, two legs, two arms, and so on.
course.
pro-simian ancestors having also had a head, a heart, lungs, legs, and
same anatomy.
delving down to the origin of beings.
derives from the reptile by a process of organic evolution, so certain
huge genealogical tree, whereof all the limbs are brothers, and the
elementary and primitive organisms.

unimaginable form.
perhaps it is better to say six.
Why, for instance, may she not have given to certain beings an
able to perceive the ethereal vibrations of the infra-red or
walls? We eat and digest like coarse animals, we are slaves to our
enables its fortunate inhabitants to dispense with this absurd process?
it can fly through the air.
the man of greatest genius, the most exquisite woman, are nailed to the
disadvantage to inhabit a world in which we might fly whither we would;
winds would be incapable of exciting a tempest, where several suns of
the sapphire--would burn night and day (azure nights and scarlet days)
the mirror of the waters, phosphorescent mountains, aerial
forms, gifted with multiple sensibilities, luminous at will,
out of curiosity? Lilliputian atoms as we are, let us once for all be
infinitude hardly glimpsed by the telescope.

blindly deny the doctrine of the plurality of worlds.
doctrine does not apply more particularly to the present epoch than to
 _Our_ time is of no importance, no absolute value.
is the field of the Eternal Sower.
worlds should be inhabited _now_ more than at any other epoch.

the Future falls incessantly into the gulf of the Past.

worlds to come and perished worlds.
cemeteries.
 What does
what did that prove to the inhabitants of Mars or of the Moon, who were

others do not resemble it, is to reason, not like a philosopher, but, as
 Every rational fish ought to assume
philosophy do not extend beyond its daily life.
this order of reasoning, except to advise a little wider perception, and

For us the resources of Nature may be considered infinite, and
inadequate, although it is the only possible basis of our reasoning.
must learn to see with the eyes of our spirit.

to hypotheses.
exception, as was suggested, and is still maintained, by some theorists.
The discovery in itself is curious enough.

composed of a central sun, and of one or more stars gravitating round
vision, and that it should revolve in such a way that the globes of
turning round him, eclipsing him more or less during this transit.
on the other hand, the eclipses would be our only means of determining
as in the case of Sirius and Procyon), it might have seemed quixotic to
our own.
at different parts of the Heavens.

variations in brilliancy, which reduce it from second to fourth
itself and the Earth, and celestial mechanics has already been able to
mass, and even the flattening of the sun Algol.
in which we know the sun and an enormous planet, whose revolution is
spectroscope.

in a period of 129 hours, and its eclipsing planet also revolves in the
 The variable star in Ophiuchus has an analogous

Since, then, a certain number of solar systems differing from our own
this affords us sufficient evidence of the existence of an innumerable
and we are no longer reduced to conjecture.

Sirius, Procyon, Altaïr, proves that these distant orbs have
perhaps never will be discovered, because they are obscure, and lost in

       *       *       *       *       *
Some _savants_ have asserted that Life can not germinate if the
conditions.


In order to examine what is happening on the Earth, let us mount the

There was an epoch when the Earth did not exist.
world of our habitation, slept in the bosom of the solar nebula.

ball, poor reflection of the King of Orbs, its parent.
rolled by before the condensation and cooling of this new globe were
rudimentary aspects.

cells, the protozoons, the zoophytes or plant-animals, the gelatinous
the reptiles, the birds, the mammals, and lastly man, who at present
kingdom.

 We may attribute some
.
 and some five years of

of the forces in action at the surface of our planet.
to have been produced by the combinations of carbon with hydrogen and
rudimentary sensibility; the sponges, corals, polyps, and medusæ, give
 They were formed in the tepid
 As long as there were no continents, no
beings breathing in the air.
by the amphibia, the reptiles.
the birds.

the secondary epoch, of the tertiary epoch, which slowly prepared the
peach and strawberry ripen?
Before it gave birth to a Helen or a Cleopatra, life manifested itself
 A
have seen modifications of existence in each of its transits, in
conditions of existence, and progressing incessantly, for if Life is the

The history of our planet is the history of life, with all its
 It is the same for all the worlds, with some exceptions

The constitution of living beings is in absolute relation with the
move, temperature, light, weight, density, the length of day and night,
--in a word, with all the cosmographic elements of a

If, for example, we compare between themselves two worlds such as the
from the Sun, we could not for an instant suppose that organic

and the same holds for intensity of light.
are 165 times longer than with us, the density of matter is three times
 Under
have to translate themselves under other forms.
elementary bodies would not be found there in the same proportions.
Consequently we have to conclude that organs and senses would not be the
 The optic nerve, for instance, which has formed and
marvels of the human eye, must be incomparably more sensitive upon
radiations that we do not perceive here.
replaced there by some other organ.
another atmosphere, are different from our own.
and digestive organs.
resemble those which exist upon the Earth.

terrestrial conditions, life could not be produced there at all.
have no right to limit the powers of Nature to the narrow bounds of our
are the type of all the worlds.
is childish.

beyond their room.

From this larger point of view, the doctrine of the plurality of worlds
 What interests us

       *       *       *       *       *
These considerations show that, in all the ages, what really constitutes
surface.

Nature, life is all, and matter nothing.

preceded us upon this globe? Where are their bodies? What is left of
 Nothing is left but the molecules of air,
, which

The whole Earth is a vast cemetery, and its finest cities are rooted in
 But now, in crossing Paris, I passed for at least the
 Germain-l'Auxerrois, and was
 I
uncovered some stone coffins still containing the skeletons that had
 From time immemorial the passers-by had
 And I reflected that it is much
 Only yesterday, some Roman tombs and
Observatory.

same case, and even more so, seeing that all that exists, all that
other beings, no longer living.
fair .
.

And you, so strong and virile, of what elements is your splendid body
assimilation been drawn from, what lugubrious adventures have they been
account consider it.
.

And yet, let us dwell on it, since this reality is the most evident
_Life_; and matter is only its substance, like the materials of a house,
framework of our bodies.

other world.

Life.
of our planet, embellishing it with its perfume; that it is just this
_raison d'être_ of things; that matter floats, and crosses, and crosses
not matter--it is the life matter is employed upon.

symphony of life.


regrets we feel, when as age comes on we look back, when we see our
visit the beloved scenes of our childhood, those homes of other years,
games, our first affections--those affections of childhood that seemed
we see again the landscape whose aspect has hardly changed, and whose
 There near
blood-curdling stories; here the kind grandmother came to see if we were
this little wood, along these alleys that seemed endless, we spread our
we played at soldiers with our elders, who were always captains; on
petrifactions; on this hill we admired the fine sunsets, the appearance
 There we began to live, to
problem, to breathe intellectually and physically.
this beloved grandfather? the good grandmother? where are all whom we
still seem to flutter in the air, and that is all.
voices, all have gone and vanished.
all.
 Were all those fine and sunny hours an
childish hearts were so tenderly attached to these fleeting shadows? Is
delusion?
It is here, above all, that we find ourselves in presence of the
 Life is the goal, it is Life that produces the
 Without Thought, where would be the Universe?
We feel that without life and thought, the Universe would be an empty
 We feel
races kindred with our own exist there in the immensities of space.
we _feel_ that this is truth.

and penetrate in some measure the secret of our destinies.
if these distant and unknown Humanities are not attached to us by
some definite moment here below, will not be prolonged into the regions

A moment ago we said that nothing is left of the body.
organisms have lived, there are no remains of them.
dust.
_
says the priest to the faithful, when he scatters the ashes on the day

The body disappears entirely.
hour after the extinction of his pyre.
any of us.
disappear one day.
end! That would be too gross a decoy.

vital and intellectual organization of the world? Nothing.


Our reason is not immense, our terrestrial faculties are sufficiently
make us feel the improbability, the absurdity, of this hypothesis, and
of the universe.

 It

irony of its smiling splendor to our mourning, our revolts, and our

          Que peu de temps suffit pour changer toutes choses!
          Et comme vous brisez dans vos métamorphoses

          D'autres vont maintenant passer où nous passâmes;
          Et le songe qu'avaient ébauché nos deux âmes,

          Car personne ici-bas ne termine et n'acheve;
          Nous nous éveillons tous au même endroit du rêve:

          Répondez, vallon pur, répondez, solitude!
          Quand nous serons couchés tous deux, dans l'attitude

            De nous savoir perdus, morts avec nos amours,
            Et de toujours sourire et de chanter toujours?[16]
_Note.
_
     How brief a time suffices for all things to change! Serene-fronted
.
 in your metamorphoses

     arrive after us: the thought sketched out by our souls will be
.
 and they will not find the solution of it.

     humans; we all awake at the same moment of the dream: we all begin

     Reply, sweet valley, reply, solitude; O Nature, sheltering in this
     the attitude of pensive death.

     and dead with our loves, you will pursue your cheerful feast, and

and summer will still smile and sing; husband and wife may ask
we not _feel_ that our destinies can not be terminated here, and that
renewed beyond, in that starry Heaven to which every dream has flown

existence is only a stage in Eternal Life.
wings, conducts us to the sanctuary of truth.
departed from our Heaven.
into our hearts.
--Accurate measurement is the foundation of
student should learn something of the astronomer's kind of measurement.
He should practice measuring the stars with all possible care, and
and apparatus are capable.
illustration of some of these measurements, such as finding the length
measurements of both length and weight are of importance in astronomy,
measurement of angles and the measurement of time.
cheap watch is usually thought of as a machine to tell the "time of
course, and then it becomes an instrument to measure the amount of time
 Astronomers use a clock
done, and to measure the amount of time required for something; and in
time from it to the nearest second or better, if it has a seconds hand,
minute hand between the minute marks on the dial.
in tenths of a minute, not in halves or quarters.

--If several watches are available, let one person tap
time by the minute hand to the nearest tenth of a minute and record the

 44.
  First tap.
 46.
  1.

 44.
  Second tap.
 46.
  1.

 46.
  Third tap.
 48.
  2.

The letters h and m are used as abbreviations for hour and minute.
first and second columns of the table are the record made by one
 After all the
and compared by taking the differences between the times recorded for
 This difference shows how much
these differences shows the degree of accuracy of the observations.
up this practice until tenths of a minute can be estimated with fair

2.
--An angle is the amount of opening or
 At
direction and the angle between them is zero.
hand is again at XII, but the hour hand has moved to I, one twelfth part
twelfth of a circumference.
of a dial to be cut up into 360 equal parts--i.
, each minute space of
is called a degree, and the measurement of an angle consists in finding

which is usually written 30°, at three o'clock it is 90°, at six o'clock

A watch may be used to measure angles.
instrument is the protractor, which is shown in Fig.
angle _A B C_ and showing that _A B C_ = 85° as nearly as the protractor

The student should have and use a protractor, such as is furnished with

[Illustration: FIG.
--A protractor.

--Draw neatly a triangle with sides about 100 millimeters
 No matter what may
180°--exactly 180° if the work were perfect--but perfection can seldom
which deals with measurement is, that however careful we may be in our
approximately correct.
for careless work, but rather as a stimulus to extra effort in order
 In the
(algebraically) to each of them one third of the amount by which their

    Correction.

  A            73.
1           73.
  B            49.
1           49.
  C            57.
1           57.
              -----                              -----
7                              180.
  Defect      + 0.

"adjusting" the observations.

 2.
]
3.
--The instruments used by astronomers for the measurement
different objects, and with a scale, like that of the protractor, to
one object to another.
between lines drawn from the instrument to two distant objects, such as
angle between the objects.
possible to determine the distance to an inaccessible point, as shown in
 2.
opposite side of a river which he can not cross.
line along his own side of the stream the distance _A B_ = 100 yards and
points _C_ and _B_, and the angle at _B_ between _C_ and _A_, finding _B
4°, _A B C_ = 49.
 To determine the distance _A C_ he draws
with a protractor he constructs at _a_ the angle _b a c_ = 73.
_b_ the angle _a b c_ = 49.
lines thus drawn meet.
distance _a c_ = 90.
across the river to be 90.
made similar to the one across the river, and millimeters on the one
 What is the proposition of geometry
problem is called a base line.

--With a foot rule and a protractor measure a base line and
 After
and compare the measured length with the one found from the angles.
any part of the work has been carelessly done, the student need not

[Illustration: FIG.
--Finding the moon's distance from the earth.

of the earth, as in Fig.
about a quarter of a million miles.

 THE HORIZON--ALTITUDES.
sailors make much use of the _plane of the horizon_, and practically any
as a part of this plane and used as such.
relating to the plane of the horizon is called "taking the sun's
and the plane of the horizon upon which they fall.
line and a plane appears slightly different from the angle between two
the sun's rays and a line drawn in the plane of the horizon toward the
 Compare this with the definition given in
angular distance north or south of the equator," and note that the
from the earth's center to the given point on its surface.

use in observation is as follows: Place a slate or a pane of glass upon
 Slightly moisten its whole surface and then
 If the water runs
and block it up until the water shows no tendency to run one way rather

 After they
it may not slip.

 TAKING THE SUN'S ALTITUDE.
--Prepare a piece of board 20

of the planed edge.
it edgewise toward the sun so that a shadow of the pin is cast on the
 Stick another pin into the board, near its upper edge, so that
a watch or clock observe the time at which the two shadows coincide.
Without lifting the board from the plane, turn it around so that the
second one was placed, and again take the time.
fine pencil lines, connecting the holes, as shown in Fig.
the protractor measure the angle thus marked.
studied elementary geometry should be able to demonstrate that at the
of the angle measured in the figure.

 4.
]
When the board is turned edgewise toward the sun so that its shadow is
plane.
called the sun's _azimuth_.
when west, it is 90°; when east, 270°, etc.

--Let a number of different students take the sun's altitude
observation, to the nearest minute.
the horizon from time to time, to make sure that no change has occurred

6.
--Make a graph (drawing) of all the
 5, and find by bisecting a set of chords
which the sun's altitude was greatest.
 5 we see from the
 50m.

physical science, and the student should carefully observe in Fig.
that the line _B B_ is a scale of times, which may be made long or
to 11, 11 to 12, etc.
 The distance of each little circle
any desired scale--e.
, a millimeter to a degree--provided the same
 Each circle is placed accurately
the altitude was taken.
not necessary, for such diagrams.
the few observations which are represented in the figure a smooth curve
and this curve shows the altitude of the sun at every moment between 9
 M.
 M.
 5 the sun's altitude at noon was 57°.
it at half past two?
[Illustration: FIG.
--A graph of the sun's altitude.

 DIAMETER OF A DISTANT OBJECT.
the angle between imaginary lines drawn from it to the opposite sides of
 Carry the protractor farther away from the window and repeat
 The angle thus
where the measurement was made.
the window we may draw upon paper an angle equal to the measured one and
distance of the window--e.
, a millimeter for each centimeter of real
 If a cross line be now drawn connecting the points thus found,
width may be read off to scale, a centimeter for every millimeter in the

The astronomer who measures with an appropriate instrument the angle
diameter and has, in fact, found it to be 2,163 miles.
method be used to find the diameter of the sun? A planet? The earth?




8.
--From the very beginning of his study in astronomy, and as
by night, to become acquainted with the constellations and their
 As an introduction to this study he may face toward the
the map of the northern heavens, given on Plate I, opposite page 124.
Turn the map around, upside down if necessary, until the stars upon it
 Note how the stars are grouped in
Little Dipper (Ursa Minor), and Cassiopeia.
should be learned so that they can be recognized at any time.

_--Facing the star map is a key which contains
brighter stars in their constellations.
part a Greek letter prefixed to the genitive case of the Latin name of
 (See the Greek alphabet printed at the end of the
)
9.
--Nearly nineteen centuries ago St.
noted that "one star differeth from another star in glory," and no more
stars present.
 Paul's day the ancient Greek
groups, which the modern astronomers still use, calling each group a
 Thus a few of the brightest stars are said to be of the
the unaided eye are said to be of the sixth magnitude, and intermediate
second, third, fourth, and fifth.
word magnitude.
to their brightness, and on the star maps of this book the larger and
brightness of the stars according to the system of magnitudes.
the indications of these maps, the student should, in learning the
is a star of the second, fourth, or other magnitude.

 OBSERVING THE STARS.
α Ursæ Minoris, α Ursæ Majoris, β Ursæ Majoris.
figure will fit on to these stars? In addition to its regular name,
the pole star.
letter of the alphabet do the five bright stars in Cassiopeia suggest?
EXERCISE 6.
the corner of a building or some other vertical line, and mark upon the
to the other stars, showing which stars are to the right and which are
 Record the time (date, hour, and minute) at which
 An hour or two later repeat the observation
that the line last drawn upon the map does not agree with the first one.
The stars have changed their positions, and with respect to the vertical

map, and use this angle and the recorded times of the observation to
 It should be
 If the observation were repeated 12 hours after the
among the stars? What would it be 24 hours later? A week later? Repeat
whole revolutions made by the stars between the two dates, again
which the stars move.

their "diurnal" motion.

importance in astronomical practice--i.
, determining something--in
interval of time, in order to get a more accurate value than could be
 Why is it more accurate? To determine the
observations separated by an interval of more than 200 years, during
 If we
length of one revolution of Mars about its axis, the large number,
result would greatly reduce whatever errors existed in the observations

Repeat Exercise 6 night after night, and note whether the stars come

[Illustration: FIG.
 The plumb-line apparatus.

 7.
]
11.
--This experiment, and many others, may be
line, and a device for sighting past it.
 6 and 7 there is
which rests in a horizontal position upon the points of three screws
 This board carries a small box, to one side of
carry the plumb line.
heavy weight--e.
, a brick or flatiron--tied to its lower end and
swinging motion of the weight.
through which the wire passes, and by turning the screws in the
swing freely in the center of the hole without touching the cover of the
 Guy wires, shown in the figure, are applied so as to stiffen the
 A board with a screw eye at each end may be pivoted to
 6, for measuring altitudes; or to the box, as in
 7, for observing the time at which a star in its diurnal motion
the screw eye through which the observer looks.

mechanical skill at a very small cost, and it or something equivalent
 To
the board with the screw eyes, attached as in Fig.
until the observer, looking through the screw eye, sees Polaris exactly
 Use a bicycle lamp to illumine the wire by night.
apparatus is now adjusted, and the observer has only to wait for the
which they pass behind the wire.
place of the vertical edge of the building, and that the board with the
relative to the wire.

 A SIDEREAL CLOCK.
they show always the same hour and minute when the stars come back to
 e.
a star-time clock.
ordinary watch? Could an ordinary watch be turned into a sidereal watch

 8.
--BARNARD.

 PHOTOGRAPHING THE STARS.
--For any student who uses a
 Upon some clear and moonless night point the camera, properly
 Upon
are shown in Fig.
 Each one of these is produced by a
position in the sky.
called the pole of the heavens.
is pointed the axis about which the earth rotates, and the motion of the
of the earth which daily carries the observer and his camera around this
poles stand still, although to the passenger upon a railway train they
 So far as simple observations are
that the motion of the stars is an apparent rather than a real one, and,
were a real movement of the stars.
photographing Fig.

 FINDING THE STARS.
heavens is at the center of the map, near Polaris, and the heavy trail
 8 is made by Polaris.
from the map any of the stars whose trails show in the photograph.
brighter the star the bolder and heavier its trail.

Vega, which are on opposite sides of Polaris and nearly equidistant from
 Do these stars share in the motion around the pole? Are they visible

Capella and note their movement.
they rise and set?
In what part of the sky do the stars move most rapidly, near the pole or

the sky and come back to the same place? How long does it take the slow

 RISING AND SETTING OF THE STARS.
indicated in these questions will show that there is a considerable part

the east of the pole and at other times west of it, but is always above
 Such stars are said to be circumpolar.
from the pole each star, when at the lowest point of its circular path,
it is away from the pole the longer does it remain invisible, until, in
horizon for twelve hours out of every twenty-four (see Fig.
 The sun
every other star at a similar distance from the pole--only, as we shall
the pole, while the sun in the course of a year changes its distance
spends above and below the horizon, producing in this way the long days

[Illustration: FIG.
--Diurnal motion of the northern constellations.

the horizon?
We say in common speech that the sun rises in the east, but this is
pole--i.
, in March and September.
south of east according as its distance from the pole is less or greater

16.
--Find from a map the latitude and
 Find on the map the place whose latitude
 Is there any
your schoolhouse?
The places of the stars in the sky are located in exactly the manner
names are used.
in place of longitude he says _right ascension_, in place of meridian he
the geographer expresses by the old ones.

equator would meet the sky along a line (a great circle) everywhere 90°

notice near what stars it runs.
would touch the sky along an hour circle--i.
, a great circle passing
 Note that
 It plays the same part
measuring longitudes; it is the beginning, from which they are reckoned.
Note also, at the extreme left end of the map, the four bright stars in
hour circle, which is marked 0.
Square in Pegasus, and may be found high up in the southern sky whenever
 Why can it not be seen when Ursa

what part of the sky the star is placed, but also in time reckonings, to
it convenient to express right ascension not in degrees but in hours,
to 15° of arc, 24 × 15 = 360.
5h.
 = 77.
in hours and minutes as given and not to change it into degrees.
should also note that some stars lie on the side of the celestial
astronomer has to distinguish between north declinations and south
latitudes and south latitudes.
signs, a + denoting that the star lies north of the celestial equator,
 e.

[Illustration: FIG.
--From a photograph of the Pleiades.

R.
 = 3h.
, Dec.
8°.
opposite page 124? In what direction are they from Polaris? This is one
bring out its richness.
naked eye, and afterward examine it with an opera glass.
you see with Fig.
 Find Antares, R.
 = 16h.
 Dec.
2°.
far is it, in degrees, from the pole? Is it visible in your sky? If so,

 A.
 of α Ursæ Majoris; of β Ursæ Majoris; of
 Find the Northern Crown, _Corona Borealis_, R.
 = 15h.
,
 = +27.
 A.
 33m.
 = +20.

These should be looked up, not only on the map, but also in the sky.

 REFERENCE LINES AND CIRCLES.
their diurnal motion, they carry the framework of hour circles and
star remain unchanged by this motion, just as longitudes and latitudes
 They are the same when a star
is below it.
heavens passes overhead, and at the moment when any particular hour
be "on the meridian"--i.
, at that particular moment they stand
corresponding celestial meridian.

its solid substance would see your geographical meridian against the
passing from one pole through your zenith to the other pole.
 11
place, _O_, as seen from the center of the earth, _C_, and the outer
we must imagine, what can not be shown on the figure, that the outer
comparison with it.
earth's axis passes through the center, then _C E_ at right angles to it
edgewise toward us; and if _C O_ is the direction of some particular
_zenith_ of that point, upon the celestial sphere.
represents a direction parallel to the horizon plane at _O_, and _H C P_

the declination of _Z_, and since by elementary geometry each of these
the
_Theorem.
zenith.

_--Any star whose declination is equal to your latitude will

[Illustration: FIG.
--Reference lines and circles.

 LATITUDE.

    ∠ _H C P_ + ∠ _Z C P_ = 90°
from which we find by subtraction and transposition
    ∠ _E C Z_ = ∠ _H C P_
and this gives the further
_Theorem.
pole above its horizon plane.

latitude, and therefore changes the angle between his horizon plane and
 What effect will this have upon the position of
of the sky would you look for Polaris? Can Polaris be seen from
Texas, in what respect would the appearance of stars in the northern sky
changed?
[Illustration: FIG.
--Diurnal path of Polaris.

--Determine your latitude by taking the altitude of Polaris
Fig.
 When it is at _1_ it is said to be at upper culmination, and
directly below it.
Castor is near the meridian.
culmination, and the star Spica is on the meridian.
is at eastern elongation, and Altair is near the meridian.
stars are conspicuous ones, which the student should find upon the map
 The altitude observed at either _2_
altitude observed when Polaris is at the positions marked _1_ and _3_
assumed equal to 1.

The plumb-line apparatus described at page 12 is shown in Fig.
slightly modified, so as to adapt it to measuring the altitudes of
 Note that the board with the screw eye at one end has been
at each end.
plumb line hangs at the middle of the hole in the box cover, the board
screw eyes, and a pencil line is to be ruled along its edge upon the
 After this has been done turn the
south, level it again and revolve the board about the screw which holds
star.
with a protractor measure the angle between these lines.
lamp if you need artificial light for your work.
studied plane geometry should be able to prove that one half of the

After you have determined your latitude from Polaris, compare the result
 With a little
within one tenth of a degree, which is equivalent to about 7 miles.
you go 10 miles north or south from your first station you should find
measured with your apparatus.

 THE MERIDIAN LINE.
the ground, use the apparatus as described at page 13, and when Polaris
line with the star and the plumb line.
convenience in observing the stars and should be laid out and
possible, all parts of the sky are visible.
convenient months for this exercise, since Polaris then comes to

20.
--What is _the time_ at which school begins in the morning?

circle which at that moment coincides with the meridian.
circle passing through Sirius coincides with the meridian, the sidereal
 40m.
astronomical language Sirius is "_on the meridian_" at 6h.
 sidereal
 As may be seen from the map, this 6h.
 is the right ascension
 40m.
crosses the meridian, it will show sidereal time.
properly regulated, every other star in the heavens will come to the
right ascension of the star.
will gain about four minutes per day in comparison with ordinary clocks,
 The student should
will serve for several persons, and a nutmeg clock or a watch of the

[Illustration: THE HARVARD COLLEGE OBSERVATORY, CAMBRIDGE, MASS.

--Set such a clock to sidereal time by means of the transit
 For this experiment it is presupposed that
simplest mode of performing the experiment required is for the observer,
his eye accurately over the northern end of the meridian line and to
during which the star appears to stand exactly above the southern end of
 The middle of this period may be taken as the time at which
equal to the right ascension of the star.
right ascension and the observed middle instant is the error of the
order to indicate true sidereal time.

plumb-line apparatus carefully adjusted, as in Fig.
joining the wire to the center of the screw eye shall be parallel to the
 Observe the time by the clock at which the star

a mirror, face up, just north of the screw eye and observe star, wire

The numerical right ascension of the observed star is needed for this
usually be best to observe one of the stars of the table at the end of
the right ascension and declination of each star as they were at the
Chapter V), these numbers all change slowly with the lapse of time, and
increased by one twentieth of a minute for each year after 1900--i.
,
0h.
6m.
 = 0h.
1m.
slightly, but as they are only intended to help in finding the star on

Having set the clock approximately to sidereal time, observe one or two
 The difference between the observed
the clock.
been taken in the several operations prescribed.
clock to the right ascension of the stars is expressed in the following


meridian.
correction of the clock.
clock is too slow, and the - sign when it is too fast.
from this equation when _A_ and _T_ are given, or _A_ may be found when
 It is in this way that astronomers measure the

Determine _U_ from each star you have observed, and note how the several

21.
--To define a thing or an idea is to give a description
thing or idea.
insufficient.
probably mischievous.

also criticise the definitions offered by his fellow-students: Equator,

Compare the following astronomical definitions with your geographical
 If you are not able to

earth's axis points.
the north pole.

the poles.

line points.
more than one zenith?
_The Horizon_ is a great circle of the sky 90° distant from the zenith.

poles.

_The Meridian_ is that hour circle which passes through the zenith.



the celestial equator.

circle and the hour circle of a certain point on the equator which is
 From spherical geometry we learn that this
intersect, as is done in the star map opposite page 124, or along the
 Right ascension is
that in which the stars appear to travel in their diurnal motion--i.
,

_The Altitude_ of a star is its angular distance above the horizon.

vertical circle passing through the star.
azimuth of 0°.
 Due north, 180°.

What is the azimuth of Polaris in degrees?
What is the azimuth of the sun at sunrise? At sunset? At noon? Are these

meridian.
stars appear to travel in their diurnal motion--i.
, from east toward

What is the hour angle of the sun at noon? What is the hour angle of

 EXERCISES.
these definitions.
mind as if they were visibly painted upon the sky.
help him to note that the poles, the zenith, the meridian, the horizon,
with respect to the observer, while the hour circles and the vernal
 Does the
What is the hour angle of the sun when it has the greatest altitude?
the altitude of the sun after sunset? In what direction is the north
which the meridian and equator respectively intersect the horizon?




23.
--Select from the map some conspicuous constellation that
a large scale a copy of all the stars of the constellation that are
 At night compare this copy with the sky, and mark in
there.
should be carefully done, and for the latter purpose what is called the
 e.
is in line with two already on the drawing and is midway between them,
three others, etc.

Major, Cassiopea, Pegasus, Taurus, Orion, Gemini, Canis Major, Leo,
constructed in this manner upon a uniform scale and preserved as a part
 Let the magnitude of the stars be represented on
which some stars present.
yellow, but occasionally one may be found of a decidedly ruddy
 g.
 Such a star map, not quite complete,
 13.

the same magnitude, but change their brightness from night to night,
something in the star itself.
these _variable stars_, as they are called.

 13.
]
24.
--Whenever the moon is visible
key map opposite page 190.
corresponding to each such observation.
correctly done, that the positions of the moon all fall near the curved
 This line is called the ecliptic.

measurement from the map how many degrees per day the moon moves.
long would it require to make the circuit of the heavens and come back

paper a drawing of it about 10 centimeters in diameter and show in the
 g.
shape of the illuminated surface (phase); the direction among the stars
moon's face, etc.
work.

answer the following questions: Does the direction of the line joining
illuminated surface of the moon have any relation to the moon's angular
the moon sets? Do the spots on the moon when visible remain always in
relation to each other? Can you determine from these spots that the moon
axis point? How long does it take to make one revolution about the axis?

observations without recourse to any book.

 THE SUN AND ITS MOTION.
smoked glass to see if there is anything there that you can sketch.

not be seen by day on account of the overwhelming glare of sunlight, but
accurately as was that of the moon, by observing from day to day its
clear days by different members of the class.

--The right ascension of the sun may be found by observing
 Use
clock correction found from observations of stars on a preceding or
 If the clock gains or loses _with respect to sidereal

EXERCISE 11.
at the time it crosses the meridian.
4, or that used with Polaris in Exercise 8.
to show from Fig.
altitude and the latitude of the place diminished by 90°, or in an


If the declination as found from this equation is a negative number it

The right ascension and declination of the sun as observed on each day
 If the
curved line (ecliptic) which runs lengthwise of the map.
fact, represents the sun's path among the stars.

the numbers on the clock dial go only from 0 to 12, and then repeat 0 to
 When the sidereal time is 13 hours, 14
, the clock will indicate 1 hour, 2 hours, etc.
must then be added to the time shown on the dial.

in the latter part of either March or September the student will find
from his observations, as accurately as possible, the date and hour of

Equinox for the spring and autumn crossings respectively, and the
right ascensions are measured.
astronomers from observations like those above described, only made with

Similar observations made in June and December show that the sun's
 They show
of it in December, from which it is easily inferred that his path, the
5, one half of
 This angle is called the obliquity of the ecliptic.
recall that in the geographies the torrid zone is said to extend 23°.
on either side of the earth's equator.
these limits and the obliquity of the ecliptic? Would it be correct to
the sun may at some season of the year pass through the zenith?
EXERCISE 12.
plotted upon the map, find by measurement the rate, in degrees per day,
 How many days will be
equinox back to vernal equinox again? Accurate observations with the
period, which is called a _tropical year_, is 365 days 5 hours 48
 Is this the same as the ordinary year of our

 THE PLANETS.
drawings prescribed in this chapter can hardly fail to have found in the
star maps, and to have found also that these stars do not remain fixed
to another.
night and plot its positions on the star map, precisely as was done for
 What kind of path does it follow?
Both the ancient Greeks and the modern Germans have called these bodies
the Greek word for wanderer, bent to our use.
there are in the heavens five planets easily visible to the naked eye
in the telescope.
the motion of sun, moon, and planets among the stars, and endeavored to
in an orbit about the earth.
permeated with this idea, which was displaced only after a long struggle
 D.
these bodies revolves about the earth, while the earth and the other
 The ecliptic is the intersection of the
along the ecliptic because, as the earth moves around its orbit, the sun
 The moon and
orbits nearly coincide with the plane of the earth's orbit, and a narrow
around the sky, is called the _zodiac_, a word which may be regarded as
of the visible planets are confined and outside of which they never
 Indeed, Mars is the only planet which ever approaches the edge

[Illustration: FIG.
--The apparent motion of a planet.

 A TYPICAL CASE OF PLANETARY MOTION.
enormously extended and developed through the Newtonian law of
Ptolemaic doctrine, and an illustration of the simple manner in which it
stars is found in Figs.
apparent motion of the planet Mars through the constellations Aries and
the true motions of Mars and the earth in their orbits about the sun
 The straight line in Fig.
upon it, is a part of the ecliptic, and the numbers placed opposite it
 In Fig.
the straight line represents the direction from the sun toward the
joining earth and sun is called the earth's longitude.
line joining the earth and sun is called the earth's radius vector, and
taken together show the direction and distance of the earth from the
 e.
 The same
lay in the same plane with that of the earth.
 14 show that
of the earth?
EXERCISE 13.
 15 what ought to have been the apparent
figures, and compare what you find with Fig.
 The apparent position
direction is represented in Fig.
the ecliptic and by its longitude.

 15.
]
The longitude of Mars for each date can be found from Fig.
measuring the angle between the straight line _S V_ and the line drawn
 Thus for October 12th we may find with the
the earth to Mars is a little more than 30°, and in Fig.
of Mars for this date is shown nearly opposite the cross line
 Just how far below the ecliptic
 15, which
in the same plane, and Mars in this case would always appear to stand

 In this way plot in
 14 the longitudes of Mars as seen from the earth for other dates
accounts for the apparently capricious motion of Mars to and fro among

[Illustration: FIG.
--The orbits of Jupiter and Saturn.

 THE ORBITS OF THE PLANETS.
its own appropriate orbit about the sun, and the exact determination of
, has been one of the
successive generations of astronomers have striven to push to a still

generally, that every planet moves in a plane passing through the sun,
coincide, so that the six orbits may all be shown without much error as
 It is, however, more convenient to
 16 and 17, one of which shows the group of
and on this account are sometimes called the inner planets, while the
the earth, whose orbit is thus made to serve as a connecting link
 These diagrams are accurately drawn to scale,
connection with the exercises and problems which follow.

contains two large planets and several hundred small ones, for the most
confusing the diagrams.

 JUPITER AND SATURN.
 16 the sun at the center is encircled
circular border showing the directions from the sun of the
 The student must note
are correctly shown, and that in order to show them at all they have
 The cross lines extending
them show the positions of the earth in its orbit on the first day of
, and the similar lines
the positions of those planets on the first day of January of each year
planets, but their actual positions in their orbits for something more

The line drawn from the sun toward the right of the figure shows the
 It forms one side of the angle which

[Illustration: FIG.
--The orbits of the inner planets.

--Measure with your protractor the longitude of the earth on
 Is this longitude the same in all years? Measure the
25, 1906.

earth for January 1, 1900, with the position of Jupiter for the same
the constellations.
the earth, and points toward the constellation in which the planet
 But this representation of the place of Jupiter in
the stars are in fact more than 100,000 times as far off as they are
constellations at the same intersection it would have if this line were
 To remedy this defect we must draw
intersection with the constellations will give very approximately the

EXERCISE 15.
them up in the sky by means of your star maps.
in the indicated constellations as very bright stars not shown on the

Which of the planets, Jupiter and Saturn, changes its direction from the
When will Jupiter and Saturn be in the same constellation? Does the

readily obtained from the figure.
millimeter scale we find for January 1, 1900, the distance of Jupiter
1 times the distance of the sun from the earth, and
approximately the distance of the sun from the earth.
it is quite as well to dispense with this multiplication and call the
1 astronomical units, remembering that the astronomical unit

EXERCISE 16.
approach? What is the greatest distance it ever attains? Is Jupiter's
from Saturn?
On what day in the year 1906 will the earth be on line between Jupiter
 e.
the planet and the sun are on opposite sides of the earth, and Jupiter
 When the
is said to be in _conjunction_ with the sun, and of course passes the
 Can you determine from the figure the
opposition and conjunction? Can you determine when it is visible in the
meridian at midnight on January 1st.
in every year?

 MERCURY, VENUS, AND MARS.
 17, which represents the orbits of
 16 only in the method of fixing the
 The motion
that it would not do to mark their positions as was done for Jupiter and
the same place on the same day in each year.
to adopt a slightly different method, as follows: The straight line
prime radius, and we know from past observations that the earth in its
and to fix the earth's position for September 23d in the diagram we have
orbit.
this point, but will have moved on along its orbit to the point marked
 Sixty days after September 23d it
, and for any date we have only to
September 23d, and this number will show at once the position of the
 Thus for the date July 4, 1900, we find
    1900, July 4 - 1899, September 23 = 284 days,
and the little circle marked upon the earth's orbit between the numbers

In what constellation was the sun on July 4, 1900? What zodiacal
constellations came to the meridian at the same time?
The positions of the other planets in their orbits are found in the same
each year, and the times at which they do cross it must be taken from

The first line of figures in this table shows the number of days that
sun, and it appears from these numbers that Mercury makes about four
radius four times in each year, while the other planets are decidedly
 The following lines of the table show for
in that year; the dates of subsequent crossings in any year can be found
the table may be extended to later years, if need be, by continuously
 In the case of Mars it appears that
prime radius.

determined its position for any required date is found exactly as in the
from the earth is found as explained above in connection with Jupiter

The broken lines in the figure represent the construction for finding
1900.
of these planets at the present time.
they are where your work puts them.

 EXERCISES.
planet which is visible in the western sky soon after sunset.
to see that such a planet must be farther toward the east in the sky
 16 or Fig.
viewed from the position of the earth lies to the left of the sun and
 If to the right
shortly before sunrise.

star at a time? What is the morning star now?
Do Mercury, Venus, or Mars ever appear in opposition? What is the
Why is Mercury a more difficult planet to see than Venus? In what month
brighter in this month than in any other? Which of all the planets comes

year.

 16 and 17 are not
lying in the same plane.
move, like the sun, always along the ecliptic; but in fact all of the
planet in its motion deviates a little from the ecliptic, first to one
this respect, ever gets more than eight degrees away from the ecliptic,
this limit.


CHAPTER IV
CELESTIAL MECHANICS

 THE BEGINNINGS OF CELESTIAL MECHANICS.
civilization, long before the beginnings of written history, the motions
constellation had commanded the attention of thinking men, particularly
 The religions of which they were the guardians
and their own power and influence were increased by a knowledge of them.

]
Out of these professional needs, as well as from a spirit of scientific
motions of the planets, simple and crude at first, because the
growing more accurate and more complex as the development of the
astronomers and enabled them to observe with increasing accuracy the
 It was early seen that while for the most
constellations from west to east, some of them sometimes reversed their
 This clearly can not
planet moves always in the same direction around a circular orbit having
circular orbit, called an epicycle, whose center was situated upon
earth was placed, as is shown in Fig.
epicycle, the large circle is the deferent, _P_ is the planet, and _E_
 When this proved inadequate to account for the really
the first one, and then another and another, until the supposed system
its fundamental theorem and taught that the motions of the planets take
earth itself is only one of the planets moving around the sun in its own
erratic movements of the other planets, since from day to day we see

[Illustration: FIG.
--Epicycle and deferent.

 KEPLER'S LAWS.
famous laws of planetary motion:
I.
foci.

 The radius vector of each planet moves over equal areas in equal

III.
to the cubes of their mean distances from the sun.

all astronomical discovery from the beginning up to his time, and they
progress has shown that they are only approximately true.

--Drive two pins into a smooth board an inch apart and
 Take up the slack of
taut, move the pencil point over the board into every possible position.
The curve thus traced will be an ellipse having the pins at the two

In the case of the planetary orbits one focus of the ellipse is vacant,
other focus.
 17 the dot, inside the orbit of Mercury, which is
and the dot _b_ is the vacant focus of Mercury's orbit.
Venus and the earth are so nearly circular that their vacant foci lie
 The line drawn
point) is a _radius vector_.
_center_ of the ellipse, and the distance of either pin from the center

Draw several ellipses with the same length of string, but with the pins
the flatter is the ellipse, but that all of them have the same length.

would you get?
The Second Law was worked out by Kepler as his answer to a problem
 In Fig.
inspection of the orbit of Mercury that this planet travels much faster
days between the numbers 10 and 20 being more than fifty per cent
 The same difference is found,
problem was to discover a means by which to mark upon the orbit the
intervals of time.
law, asserts that if we draw radii vectors from the sun to each of the
area of the sector formed by two adjacent radii vectores and the arc
sector, the short radii vectores being spread apart so as to include a
 In
with the planet and in each day to sweep over the same fractional part
 The spacing of the numbers in Fig.
was done by means of this law.

"mean distance" which appears in it is one half of the long diameter of
required by the planet to make a complete circuit in its orbit.
Representing the first of these by _a_ and the second by _T_, we have,


for every planet of the solar system.
the earth from the sun as the unit of distance, and the year as the unit
_C_ = 1.
same units, _a_ = _T_^{2/3}, by means of which we may determine the
been learned from observation.

--Uranus requires 84 years to make a revolution in its
 What is its mean distance from the sun? What are the mean
periodic times.
distances from the sun to move around their orbits in the same time?
A circle is an ellipse in which the two foci have been brought together.
Would Kepler's laws hold true for such an orbit?
34.
--Kepler studied and described the motion of
 Newton, three generations later (1727 A.
), studied and
 To Kepler and his
they are a part of Nature, governed by the same laws which obtain upon
foundation of celestial mechanics.

a level road if it is smooth than if it is rough; but however smooth and
it is sooner or later stopped by the resistance which the road and the
started again only by applying fresh power.
illustration of what is called
THE FIRST LAW OF MOTION.
of uniform motion in a straight line except in so far as it may be
" A gust of wind, a stone, a
left, but unless some disturbing force is applied it will go straight
always at the speed given it by the last power applied, swerving neither

When a slow rider increases his speed we recognize at once that he has
it equally shows that force has been applied against the motion.
force alone which can produce a change in either velocity or direction
Galileo to discover it and of Newton to give it the form in which it is

35.
is:
"Change of motion is proportional to force applied and takes place in
" Suppose a
weight is the force which pulls him down, and that force operating at
of his fall a downward velocity of 32 feet per second--i.
, it has
toward the earth because the force acts in that direction.
next second the ceaseless operation of this force will have the same
velocity, so that two seconds from the time he commenced to fall he will
 The column of figures
of subsequent seconds.
motion to which the law refers, and the velocity is proportional to the
exerted in this case is proportional to the time during which it
 The distance through which the man will fall in each second is
his velocity at the beginning and end of this second, and the total
_s_ in the table, is found by taking the sum of all the preceding values
 The velocity, 32 feet per second, which measures the change of
produces this motion, and it is usually represented in formulæ by the
 Let the student show from the numbers in the table that the
space, _s_, fallen through, satisfy the relation
    s = 1/2 gt^{2},
which is usually called the law of falling bodies.
show that _g_ is equal to 32?
            TABLE
    _t_   _v_   _d_   _s_
     0      0     0     0
     2     64    48    64
     4    128   112   256
    etc.
  etc.

If the balloon were half a mile high how long would it take to fall to

]
Fig.
by a bat at the point _A_, and started off in the direction _A B_ with a
 In accordance with the first law of
by the bat, it should travel along the straight line _A B_ at the
it should be 800 feet from _A_, at the point marked 4, but during these
position, 4', is 256 feet below the point 4.
position at the end of each second, 1', 2', 3', 4', etc.
line through these points we shall find the actual path of the ball
 No
get back to the point _A_, and the curve _A C_ therefore can not be a
 It is, in fact,
in which comets and some other heavenly bodies move.
in the same kind of a path, and so does a stone, a bullet, or any other

[Illustration: FIG.
--The path of a ball.

 THE THIRD LAW OF MOTION.
and contrary reaction; or the mutual actions of any two bodies are
" This is well illustrated in the
 The direct force or action
of the rope to this pull which lifts him along it.
later chapter a curious application of this law to the history of the

It is the great glory of Sir Isaac Newton that he first of all men
well as upon the earth; that the complicated motion of a planet, a
forces which act upon the bodies, and that these forces are essentially
 The formal statement of the

 NEWTON'S LAW OF GRAVITATION.
universe attracts every other particle with a force whose direction is
product of their masses, and inversely as the square of their distance
" We know that we ourselves and the things about us are
Latin that Newton wrote, _gravitas_, and the word marks well the true
 Newton did not discover a new
limited terrestrial sphere of action to an unlimited and celestial one,
operates.
gaseous, is of no account in determining the force which it exerts,

The student should perhaps be warned against straining too far the
 The law of
remotest corner of the universe precisely as stated above, but
supplement our rather scanty stock of knowledge concerning what happens
 We may not controvert the words of a popular preacher who says,
wish to stand sponsor for them, even though they are justified by a

The word _mass_, in the statement of the law of gravitation, means the
letters _m´_ and _m´´_ the respective quantities of matter contained in
accordance with the law of gravitation, the following mathematical


This equation, which is the general mathematical expression for the law
 Thus, if we
their centers are 1 centimeter apart, the above expression for the force


between these bodies.
evidently furnishes a measure of the specific intensity with which one
 Elaborate experiments which have
surprisingly small, for in the case of the two bullets whose mass of 1
space, gravity would have to operate between them continuously for more
separated by only 1 centimeter to start with, and nothing save their own
 It is only when one or both of the
large, and the weight of bodies at the surface of the earth is
up the earth.
earth, as the mathematical astronomers have found by applying the law of
language, to "weigh" them.

synonymous; mass is defined above as the quantity of matter contained in
body, and in accordance with the law of gravitation its weight depends
independent of its position with respect to the earth.

just as strongly as the body is pulled toward the earth--i.
, by a
 How much does the earth rise

 THE MOTION OF A PLANET.
 20 _S_ represents the sun and _P_ a
straight line _P 1_.
continue to move along this line with uniform velocity if no external
and by virtue of this attraction the body is pulled aside from the line

Knowing the velocity and direction of the body's motion and the force
Newton's laws of motion so as to determine the path of the body, and a
stroke marks the point of each orbit which is nearest to the sun.
point is called the _perihelion_.

the swifter the motion of the body at _P_ the shorter will be the time
therefore the force exerted by the sun, and the resulting change of

On the other hand, _P 5_ and _P 6_ represent orbits in which the
motion greater than would be possible for a more swiftly moving body.

at all?
What would be the effect if the body starting at _P_ moved directly away

 20.
]
The student should not fail to observe that the sun's attraction tends
its velocity, and that this influence continues until the planet reaches
force of the sun's attraction is wholly expended in changing the
 After the planet has passed perihelion the
measure that before perihelion passage it increased it, so that the
perihelion through the sun are exactly alike.
explanation of Kepler's second law: when the planet is near the sun it
than when the planet is remote from the sun on account of the greater
rates at which the radius vector turns in different parts of the orbit,

When the velocity is not too great, the sun's backward pull, after a
toward the sun again, in such a way that it comes back to the point _P_,
 e.
it has gone around the sun in an orbit like _P 6_ or _P 4_, an ellipse,
 But we must not fail to
line in the statement of the law of gravitation (p.
the magnitude of this force were inversely as the cube of the distance
very different.
overcome, the orbit will be a hyperbola, like _P 2_, along which the
of what the sun can control gives an orbit like _P 3_, a parabola, along
diminishing as the body gets farther from the sun, but is always just
 If the earth's velocity could be
parabolic velocity, and would quit the sun's company.

moves around the sun, or past the sun, depends upon its velocity and if
orbit are known the whole orbit is determined by them, and the position
determined through the application of Newton's laws; and the same is
 It is in
particular part of the sky a given planet will appear at a given time.

instead of circles, but it is easily seen from Fig.
_P_, could not by any possibility move in a circle, since the direction
the sun as it must be in a circular orbit, and even if it were
the right velocity given to it at this point, since either more or less
 In order to produce
required to make a pin stand upon its point, and the really surprising
they are.
untrained eye would not detect the slightest deviation from a true
 17), which is much more

[Illustration: FIG.
 An impossible orbit.

is called in geometry a hyperbola, and Newton succeeded in proving from
in a hyperbola as well as in a parabola or ellipse; but it must move in
[1] Thus it would
describe about the sun any such orbit as is shown in Fig.
 If the
the figure, then it must retrace, time after time, the whole path that
 e.
orbit must be an ellipse.

      of these curves, which, taken collectively, are called the conic

Newton also proved that Kepler's three laws are mere corollaries from
must be slightly altered so as to take into account the masses of the
 These are, however, so small in comparison with that of the

39.
--In what precedes we have considered the motion of a
while in fact, as the law of gravitation asserts, every other body in

called _perturbations_, but for the most part these are insignificant,
either very small or very remote, and it is only when our moving planet,
Jupiter or one of the other planets that the perturbations caused by

The problem of the motion of three bodies--sun, Jupiter, planet--which
have considered, and the ablest mathematicians and astronomers have not
worked upon the problem for two centuries, and have developed an immense

[Illustration: THE LICK OBSERVATORY, MOUNT HAMILTON, CAL.

changing its size and shape and position, backward and forward in
moment how far this process may extend.
orbit were very much increased or diminished by the perturbing action of
correspondingly changed, and the earth, perhaps, be rendered unfit
 The tipping of the plane of the earth's orbit
great French mathematician of a century ago, Laplace, succeeded in
are actually in progress they can not, at least for millions of years,
all the other planets, unless here and there an asteroid may prove an

The precession (Chapter V) is a striking illustration of a perturbation
connection with the plane of the moon's orbit.
that the moon in its motion among the stars never goes far from the
once in going from south to north and once in the opposite direction.
The points at which it crosses the ecliptic are called the _nodes_, and
along the ecliptic about twenty degrees per year, an extraordinarily
eclipses.

 22.
Jupiter.

 WEIGHING THE PLANETS.
considered dangerous, they are interesting since they furnish a method
 From the law of gravitation
directly upon its mass, since the force _F_ which it exerts contains
 So, too, the divisor _r^{2}_ in the
and disturbed bodies is a matter of great consequence, for the smaller
 When, therefore, the mass of a
produces, it is customary to select some such opportunity as is
 22, where one of the small planets, called asteroids,
approaches close to the orbit of Jupiter, and at another place comes
 For the most part Jupiter will not exert
orbit as this, since it is only at rare intervals that the asteroid and
 The
Jupiter is used to study the motion given to it by the sun's
which it moves; but there comes a time at which the asteroid passes
the sun imparts to it will then be greatly disturbed, and when the
effect of these disturbances upon its apparent position in the sky will
 If now the
right ascension and declination, and compares these with the position
Jupiter is ignored, the differences between the observed right
undisturbed motion will measure the influence that Jupiter has had upon
with the amount by which the sun has moved it--that is, with the motion
part of the mass of the sun.

solar system which is large enough to produce any appreciable
fractions of the mass of the sun, as may be seen from the following
which the mass of the sun must be divided in order to get the mass of

    Venus          408,000
    Mars         3,093,500
4
    Uranus          22,800

includes the mass of all the satellites which attend it, since their

moon.

 DISCOVERY OF NEPTUNE.
found in connection with the discovery, in the year 1846, of Neptune,
 For many years the motion of
 In
having the sun at one of its foci, but no ellipse could be found which
the misfit was not very pronounced.
deviations of Uranus from the best path which theory combined with
caused by an unknown planet more remote from the sun--a thing easy to
disturber.
Le Verrier in France, attacked the problem quite independently of each
irregularities in the motion of Uranus were indeed caused by an unknown
of the constellation Aquarius; and there it was found on September 23d
to search for it, and found within a degree of the exact point which the

This working backward from the perturbations experienced by Uranus to
scientific achievements of the human intellect, and it is worthy of note
Neptune now behaves much as did Uranus three quarters of a century ago,
anomalies in its path is that the bounds of the solar system must be

42.
--There is an effect of gravitation not yet
astronomy--viz.
bodies.
the center by the attraction of the other parts, and if this attraction
would be crushed by it into a truly spherical form, no matter what may
 But such is not the
particle of its body a force which is sometimes called _centrifugal_,
which tend at every moment to keep unchanged the direction of their
circular path marked out by the earth's rotation, just as a stone tied
string and opposes the constraint which keeps it moving in a circle.
few experiments with such a stone will show that the faster it goes the
particle of the earth, the swiftly moving ones near the equator having a
 At the
gravity, and in effect diminishes it, so that, comparatively, there is
axis and causes it to bulge out at the equator until a balance is thus
 As we have learned from the study of geography, in the case of
planets, Jupiter and Saturn, it is much greater, amounting to several

But rotation is not the only influence that tends to pull a planet out
 The attraction which the earth exerts upon the moon is
than at its center, and this difference of attraction tends to warp the
 23 where _1_, _2_, and _3_ represent
magnet, _H_.
back by a weight to which it is fastened by means of a cord running over
 These weights are all to be
with a force just sufficient to balance the attraction of the magnet for
 _2_.

exerted upon it by the magnet and the weight just balance each other.
Upon No.
 _2_,
exerted by the weight, so that No.
 _2_
joining _1_ and _2_, until their tension, together with the force
 For
 _3_, the force exerted by the magnet is less than that of the
 _2_ until its elastic
 The net result is that the
together by the elastic cords, are pulled apart by this outside force as

[Illustration: FIG.
--Tide-raising forces.

shape of the moon.
 23 stand for the attraction

different parts of the moon.
its orbital motion which, as we have seen in a previous section, upon
falling into it.
moon along a line pointing toward the earth, just as the blocks were
of the moon slightly but permanently longer than the others.

 24.
]
THE TIDES.
earth with different forces and feebly tend to pull it out of shape.
here a new element comes into play: the earth turns so rapidly upon its
strains, which shift rapidly from one diameter to another as different
waters of the sea which respond to the distorting effect of the sun's
 These are heaped up on opposite sides of the
 24
out from under the moon and is pulled back by the moon until it finally
of the earth's rotation in carrying it one way is just balanced by the
 This heaping up
 If _I_ in the figure represents a
accompany it in its diurnal rotation about the earth's axis, but
swell up as a part of the tidal wave and will encroach upon the land in
 So too when they reach _I´´_,
these points, at _I´_, the waters must subside, giving low or ebb tide.

few feet, and the tide raised by the sun is even less, but along the
that a broad but low tidal wave is forced into a narrow corner, and then
and the lunar tide come in together, as they do twice in every month, at
 Why do they come together at these times instead of

certain cases be very much greater--e.
, if the moon were as massive
than it now is and would suffice to grind the earth into fragments.
Although the earth escapes this fate, some other bodies are not so
disintegration.

 THE SCOPE OF THE LAW OF GRAVITATION.
science there is no other law so famous as the Newtonian law of
elaborated by astronomers and mathematicians, and perhaps none that can
 Over and over again mathematical
hitherto unsuspected, have afterward been found true, as when Newton
flattened at the poles--a thing not known at that time, and not proved
 It is, in fact, this
detail the complicated phenomena of the heavens and the earth that
therefore worth while to note that at the present time there are a very
things observed.
the long diameter of whose orbit is slowly turning around in a way for
 Whether
it only marks a case in which astronomers have not yet properly applied
be the one or the other, this and other similar cases show that even
science.


CHAPTER V
THE EARTH AS A PLANET

 THE SIZE OF THE EARTH.
his study of geography, that the earth is a globe about 8,000 miles in
given for these statements, we proceed to consider the principles upon

[Illustration: FIG.
--Measuring the size of the earth.

 25 the circle represents a meridian section of the earth; _P P´_
beam of light coming from a star in the plane of the meridian, and so
other.
represent the direction of the vertical at these points, and the angles
equal to the angular distance of the star from the zenith of the place
 We have already seen, in
the figure that the difference between any two of these angles--e.
,
between the points _1_ and _2_.
the star from the zenith, the astronomer finds the angles at the center
, at which his
 If the meridian were a perfect circle the change
the equator to the pole, would be perfectly uniform--the same number of
parts of the earth show that this is very nearly true, but that, on the
greater distance than is required for a given change in the angle at the
 The earth is, in fact, flattened at the poles to the amount of
well as by smaller variations due to mountains and valleys, the shape of
 These astronomical measurements
satisfactory proof that it is very approximately a sphere, and furnish

Neglecting the _compression_, as it is called, i.
, the 27 miles by
may easily be found by measuring the distance _1_--_2_ along the
measuring the meridian altitudes of any star as seen from _1_ and _2_.
Draw on paper an angle equal to the measured difference of altitude and
between the sides, measured along an arc of a circle, equal to the
 This distance from the vertex

EXERCISE 19.
above.
at which observations are made must be separated by a considerable
 e.
 They need not be on the same meridian, but
between them, there must be used the projection of that distance upon
 e.

By co-operation between schools in the Northern and Southern States,
earth may be measured with the plumb-line apparatus described in Chapter

45.
--We have seen in Chapter IV the possibility
sun's mass, but nothing was there shown, or could be shown, about

kilogrammes, and while the principles involved in this determination are

[Illustration: FIG.
--Illustrating the principles involved in
]
In Fig.
surface of the earth and to be attracted toward the center of the earth,


experiment, and _R_ is the radius of the earth, 3,963 miles.
no disturbing influence present, the plumb line will point directly
placed at one side, _1_, it will attract the plumb line with a force


its mass which we may suppose, for illustration, to be a ton.
consequence of this attraction the plumb line will be pulled a little to
length of the plumb line and by _d_ the distance between the original


_E_ the proportion thus transformed, we find
    E = B × l/d × (R/r)^{2}.

line, _l_, the distance between the center of the ball and the center of
measured directly, and _d_, the amount by which the plumb bob is pulled
the other side, at _2_, and measuring with a microscope how far the
 This distance will, of course, be equal to _2 d_.

complicated as well as more precise, the mass of the earth is found to
 e.
kilogrammes 60,258 × 10^{20}.
millionth part of this mass.

ton, and the distance between the two positions of the ball, _1_ and
of place?
Find from the mass of the earth and the data of § 40 the mass of the sun
 Find also the mass of Mars.
abridged by the use of logarithms.

 PRECESSION.
upon which to rest, is sufficiently shown by the fact that the stars are
toward them.
freely about the sun in a circuit which it completes once every year,
at all seasons directed very nearly toward the star Polaris.
should be able to show from his own observations of the sun that, with
about a degree a day.
sun?
But it is only in appearance that the pole maintains its fixed position
 If photographs are taken year after year, after the
(nearly) toward Polaris, and making this star describe a smaller and
pole (in right ascension 12h.
larger circles in their diurnal motion; but the process takes place so
pole to equal the angular diameter of the full moon.

the earth's diurnal rotation.
truly vertical the top "sleeps"; but if the axis is tipped ever so
the axis prolonged out to the sky and provided with a pencil point as a
pole of the top would move, and a little observation will show that the
become and the more rapidly does the wobbling take place.
for the spinning of the top about its axis, it would promptly fall over
force which pulls the top over and produces the wobbling motion.
the top in opposite directions, with the hands of a watch and contrary
wobbling.

 Its diurnal
 This axis is tipped 23.
the perpendicular to its orbit (obliquity of the ecliptic) just as the
 In consequence of
miles), and the sun and moon, by virtue of their attraction (see Chapter
the earth's orbit, so that if it were not for the spin this force would
 But
to produce a wobble which is called precession, and whose effect we
 The
since the tipping force for the earth is relatively very small, and a
pole about its center of motion.
and the wobble of the top, but this influence seems wholly absent in the
century to century, save for certain minor forces which for a time
way and then in another, without in the long run producing any results

The center of motion, about which the pole travels in a small circle
5°, is at that point of the heavens
and may be found on the star map in right ascension 18h.
 and
5°.

--Find this point on the map, and draw as well as you can
 The motion of the pole along its path is
 Mark the position of the pole along
dealing with some of the following questions:
Does the wobbling of the top occur in the same direction as the motion
the same direction? What will be the polar star 12,000 years hence? The
when Alpha Draconis was the bright star nearest the pole.
was that?
The motion of the pole of course carries the equator and the equinoxes
of all the stars.
of the equinoxes, and this motion of the equinox, slow though it is, is
length of the year.

declinations to be again what they now are?
In what direction is the pole moving with respect to the Big Dipper?
Polaris will the precession carry the pole? What other bright stars will

 THE WARMING OF THE EARTH.
average warmer than the night, and it is easy to see that this surplus
into the void which surrounds the earth; just as the heat contained in a
taken out from the furnace and placed amid colder surroundings.
earth's loss of heat by radiation goes on ceaselessly day and night,
steadily diminish the temperature toward what is called the "absolute
 e.
which there can be no greater degree of cold.
confounded with the zero temperatures shown by our thermometers,
Centigrade), a temperature which by comparison makes the coldest winter
many degrees below its zero.
surrounding space on every side of it is another example of the same
it, and it is the minute fraction of this heat poured out by the sun,
produces what we call weather, climate, the seasons, etc.

process.
steady outflow of heat, and air and ground grow steadily colder, but
because it strikes the earth's surface very obliquely, but becoming more
 But as the air
more readily and rapidly with their store of heat, just as a steam pipe
 The warmest
expenditure of heat are just balanced; and barring such disturbing
the time--an hour or two beyond noon--at which the diminishing altitude
upper hand and the temperature becomes for a short time stationary, and

We have here an example of what is called a periodic change--i.
, one
a minimum up to a maximum temperature and then back again to a minimum,
 But it must be
winds, water, etc.
sometimes obscure or even obliterate the diurnal variation of

Expose the back of your hand to the sun, holding the hand in such a
the hand so that the light falls quite obliquely upon it and note how
position than in the second.
makes the sun's warmth more effective when he is high up in the sky than
winter.

place along a path which carries it alternately north and south of the
5°, and the stars show by their earlier
pole of the heavens, that as the sun moves northward from the equator,
night a little shorter, and every day the sun will rise higher toward
the sun begins to move southward, bringing shorter days and smaller
sun moves northward.
its complete course in a period of a year, and it is easy to see that
the long days and great altitudes of summer producing the greater warmth
by diminishing the daily supply of solar heat, bring on the winter's
 The succession of the seasons, winter following summer and summer
is due to the obliquity of the ecliptic, or, what is the same thing, the
to the plane of its orbit, and the seasons are simply a periodic change
but of longer period.

summer is completed, the year, as we commonly call it, must equal the
vernal equinox again, since this furnishes a complete cycle of the sun's
 On account of the westward
time required for a complete revolution of the earth in its orbit, but
 23s.
the sun.

 RELATION OF THE SUN TO CLIMATE.
and southern hemispheres of the earth must have substantially the same
both alike; but when the sun is north of the equator and warming our
other hemisphere, the days there are short and winter reigns at the
reversed.

no such marked change from cold to warm as we experience, because, as
5° away from the celestial equator, on
within 23.
is no such periodic change in the heat supply as is experienced in
both higher and more uniform than in our latitude.

sky; at the poles his greatest altitude is only 23.
winter season he does not rise at all, so that the temperature is here
or months at a time the supply of solar light is entirely cut off, the

If the obliquity of the ecliptic were made 10° greater, what would be
10° less?
Does the precession of the equinoxes have any effect upon the seasons or

would the seasons be any different from what they are now?
49.
--Although we live upon its surface, we are not
earth's outermost layer and extends above our heads to a height of many
 The study of most of the phenomena of the atmosphere belongs to
which fairly come within our consideration of the earth as a planet.
can not see the stars save as we look through this atmosphere, and the
present serious obstacles to any accurate telescopic study of the
 Frequently this disturbance is visible to the naked
 e.
color many times per second, solely in consequence of a disturbed

it is worth noting that the planets show very little of it because the
star, being much smaller and farther from the earth, has its disk
by local disturbances in the atmosphere than is the broader beam which

50.
--At all times, whether the stars twinkle or not, their
appear to stand higher up in the sky than their true positions.
effect, which the astronomer calls refraction, must be allowed for in
its amount is a very small fraction of a degree, but near the horizon it
eye by distorting the disks of the sun and moon from circles into ovals
 The refraction lifts both upper
thus shortening the vertical diameter.
 27, which shows not only
of the sea, still further flattening the image.
water were flat, the reflected image would have the same shape as the
that the earth's surface is curved.

half a degree, and since the diameters of the sun and moon subtend an
reality the whole disk of either sun or moon is below the horizon at the
moonset begins.
the duration of sunshine or of moonshine is on the average about six
no refraction.
that the atmosphere absorbs the light of the heavenly bodies, so that
higher up in the sky, and by reason of this absorption the setting sun
dazzling luster causes at noon.

 27.
by reflection from the surface of the sea.

 THE TWILIGHT.
than the preceding, is the twilight.
catches the rays of the coming sun before they reach the lowland, and at
the particles of dust and vapor, which always float in the atmosphere,
sun is still below the horizon, giving at the beginning and end of day

[Illustration: FIG.
--Twilight phenomena.

 28 shows a part of the earth surrounded by such a dust-laden
which, on the right of the figure, lies in the shadow cast by the earth.
To an observer placed at _1_ the sun is just setting, and all the
twilight.
to _2_, all the region to the east of his zenith lies in the shadow,
still comes a twilight, but now comparatively faint, because the lower
mainly its upper regions from which the light comes, and here the dust
 Still
point _3_, every vestige of twilight will have vanished from his sky,
horizon, which is represented by the line _3 L_.
is represented to be 78° below this horizon line at the end of twilight,
drawing--in fact, twilight is usually said to end when the sun is 18°

Let the student redraw Fig.
and _3_ shall be only 18° apart, as seen from the earth's center.
will find that the point _L_ is brought down much closer to the surface
for the "height of the atmosphere" about one-eightieth part of the
 e.
 This, however,
 The air extends far beyond
sunlight down to the earth seem all to lie below this limit.

see the shadow of the earth rise up and fill it while the twilight arch

[Illustration: FIG.
--The cause of long and short twilights.

_--Since twilight ends when the sun is 18° below
shorten the duration of twilight, and anything which retards the
 Chief among
the horizon.
 29, a much
needed in the case shown at _b_ in the same figure, where the motion is
 If we consider different latitudes and
circumstance from _a_ to _b_, and corresponding to these, the duration
and more northern lands to an hour or less in the mountains of Peru.
the sake of graphical effect, the shortness of tropical twilight is

     At one stride comes the dark.
                            _The Ancient Mariner.

last for a little more than two hours, while the shortest ones are in
but at all times the last half hour of twilight is hardly to be
in the upper regions of the atmosphere.
customary to assume in the courts of law that twilight ends an hour

How long does twilight last at the north pole?
_The Aurora.
only to point out that it is not of an astronomical character.
Aurora, or northern lights, is as purely an affair of the earth as is a
magnetism.


CHAPTER VI
THE MEASUREMENT OF TIME

 SOLAR TIME.
which it must be expressed.
degree is the unit for angular measurement.
the centimeter is adopted as the unit with which to measure distances,

for use in dealing with shorter periods than a day, and the week, month,

Strictly speaking, a day is not the time required by the earth to make
time required for a particular part of the sky to make the complete
back to the meridian again.
specified part of the sky is on the meridian, and "the time" at any
 e.
number of hours, minutes, etc.
meridian.

based upon the motion of the vernal equinox, and which furnishes
in dealing with the motions of the stars, is decidedly inconvenient for
takes no account of daylight and darkness.
whether 10 hours, sidereal time, falls in the day or in the night.
must in some way obtain a day and a system of time reckoning based upon
the sun itself as the point in the heavens whose transit over the
 In this system
, which have elapsed
shown by a sun dial, and which was in general use, years ago, before
 Since the sun moves among the stars
have to turn farther in order to carry any particular meridian from the
same star, or from the vernal equinox around to the vernal equinox
the hour hand round to the hour hand again than it turns in going from
 These solar days and hours and minutes are therefore a
the explanation why the stars come to the meridian a little earlier, by
gains steadily upon solar time, this gain amounting to approximately
 56.
 per day, or exactly one day per year, since the sun makes the

With the general introduction of clocks and watches into use about a
well-regulated clock could keep the time correctly.
orbital motion around the sun goes faster in some parts of its orbit
among the stars in winter than in summer; moreover, on account of the
amount of motion along the ecliptic produces more effect in winter and
autumn when the sun is near the equator, and as a combined result of
itself not uniform, but falls behind the uniform lapse of sidereal time
 A true solar
December.

 30.
]
53.
--To remedy these inconveniences there has been
which is perfectly uniform in its lapse and which, by comparison with
 "The time" in this system
two for any particular day may be found in any good almanac, or may be
 30, in which the part of the curve above the
true solar time.
kinds of solar time is the _equation of time_, but in the almanacs it is
" In sidereal time and true
 M.
before the sun reaches the meridian) and P.
 hours (_post meridiem_ =
counted from 0 hours to 24 hours, commencing when the sun or vernal
 Occasionally the attempt is made to
the day (date) at midnight and counting the hours consecutively up to
 Such a system
American public is slow to adopt it, although the system has come into

54.
--RULE I.
When the mean solar time is known.
an ordinary watch, and represent by _S_ the corresponding sidereal time
date in question.


The last term is expressed in minutes, and should be reduced to hours
 Thus at 4 P.
 on July 4th--
                _D_ = 103 days.
    69/70 × _D_ × 4 = 406m.
                    = 6h.

 0m.
                _S_ = 10h.

The daily gain of sidereal upon mean solar time is 69/70 of 4 minutes,
together, taking the average of one year with another, but it varies a
years.

 When the stars in the northern sky can be seen.
Cassiopeiæ, and imagine a line drawn from it to Polaris, and another
 The sidereal time is equal to the angle
zenith toward the west.
dividing by 15.

 THE EARTH'S ROTATION.
may run faster at one time than at another, and it is worth while to
 It is
turns about its axis with absolute uniformity, so that mean solar time
 Whether
convincing proof of a variation large enough to be measured, although it
perfectly fixed within the body of the earth.
earth wriggles about this axis like a fish upon a hook, so that the
year to the extent of 40 or 50 feet (15 meters) without ever getting
 This is probably
part of the earth to another as the seasons change, and it seems
rotation of the earth.
interval of time as a year or a century, so far as present knowledge
 For
 g.
a very different one, and we shall have to meet it again in another

56.
--In what precedes there has been constant
 The day begins when the sun is on the
 Solar time is the angular distance of the sun past the
 Sidereal time was determined by observing transits of stars
 But every
reckoned, and in Fig.
falling upon a part of the earth's equator through which the meridians
rays make different angles with the meridians, and that the sun is
an amount just equal to the angle at _O_ between these meridians.
angle is called by geographers the difference of longitude between the
used in a different sense from that on page 36.
 31 we obtain

_--The difference between "the times" at any two meridians is
meridian is greater than at the western meridian.
express differences of longitude in hours instead of degrees.
 = 15°.

which enter into it--e.
, New York sidereal time means the hour angle
true solar time is the hour angle of the sun reckoned from the meridian

[Illustration: FIG.
--Longitude and time]
[Illustration: FIG.
--Standard time.

 STANDARD TIME.
use throughout the United States and Canada of four "standard times,"
than the time of the meridian passing through the Royal Observatory at

    Eastern time is 5 hours slower than that of Greenwich.
    Central  "      6  "      "     "    "         "
    Pacific  "      8  "      "     "    "         "
In Fig.
States and Canada in which these several kinds of time are used, and

Standard time is sent daily into all of the more important telegraph
to the almost complete exclusion of local time.

 TO DETERMINE THE LONGITUDE.
of the sun's transit over your local meridian, and correct the observed
 30.
difference between the corrected time and 12 o'clock will be the
 Compare your
correction referred to standard time.
corrections is the difference between your longitude and that of the

N.
--Don't tamper with the watch by trying to "set it right.
will be done if it is wrong, provided you take due account of the

If the correction of the watch changed between your observation and the
longitude determination? How can you avoid this effect?
59.
--The Century Dictionary defines chronology as "the
by regular divisions or periods according to the revolutions of the sun
"
We have already seen that for the measurement of short intervals of time
complete and convenient system.
hundreds and thousands of days, a larger unit of time is required, and
peoples been based upon astronomical considerations.
is one marked exception.
the dime is a multiple of the cent, and while it may have had its origin
does not follow these with any considerable accuracy.
longer units of time--the month and the year--had equally been made to
misunderstanding might have been avoided, and the annals of ancient
the case.
among the stars.
sun through the heavens and the change of seasons which is thus
the time required by the earth to make one complete revolution in its
 This time of one revolution is called a sidereal year, while, as
the seasons is shorter than this on account of the precession of the
 It is called a tropical year with reference to the circuit

We can readily understand why primitive peoples should adopt as units of
kind of difficulty that we should experience in trying to use both
 How
English shillings and American dimes, etc.
in terms of the other?
One of the Greek poets[2] has left us a quaint account of the confusion
in the calendar:
    "The moon by us to you her greeting sends,
    And takes it much amiss that you will still
    So that when gods, who know their feast days well,
    They scold and storm at her for your neglect.


60.
--If the day, the month, and the year are to be
contained in the month and year, and when this has been done by the
daily use; and much of the history of chronology consists in an account
integral numbers to replace the cumbrous decimal fractions which follow.

 D.

242197 mean solar days.
     "     "      "   = 365d.
 48m.
8s.
    One lunation      = 29.

 12h.
 2.

The word _lunation_ means the average interval from one new moon to the
 e.
with the sun round to conjunction again.

months alternately of 29 and 30 days in length, but this was
 At the end of four years this
end of forty years ten days in error, and within a single lifetime the
weather being due in March, according to the calendar.
under this arrangement did not consist of any integral number of months,
5 days being 354 days, and 13
5 days, thus making any particular month change its position
comparatively short time.
an independent unit and adopted a conventional year of 12 lunar months,
is known as the wandering year, with reference to the changing positions
 Others held to the astronomical year and
just make up a year, as is done to this day in our own calendar, whose
jingle as the following:
    "Thirty days hath September,
    All the rest have thirty-one
    Which alone hath twenty-eight,
"

 THE CALENDAR.
ascribed to Julius Cæsar, who, under the advice of the Egyptian
whereby every fourth year was to consist of 366 days, while ordinary
 He also placed the beginning of the year
been, and gave his own name, Julius, to the month which we now call
 August was afterward named in honor of his successor, Augustus.
The names of the earlier months of the year are drawn from Roman
, meaning
year, before Cæsar's reformation, and also their places in some of the
during mediæval times with regard to the day on which the new year
employed at different times and places.

a year 365.
length of the tropical year, a difference so small that for ordinary
desired.
in the course of time shift the seasons, the vernal and autumnal
of mediæval Europe found here ground for objection to Cæsar's calendar,
reference to the vernal equinox, and with the lapse of centuries Easter
late in the sixteenth century, decreed another reformation, whereby ten
called March 21st, to bring back the vernal equinox to the date on which
 D.
adopted as the fundamental epoch of his calendar.

old time, Gregory purposed to keep it in such agreement for the future
whose number is divisible by 4 shall be a leap year except those years
 These
 g.
 The calendar
Julian calendar, and it found speedy acceptance in those civilized
slow to adopt it, and it was introduced into England and her American
after Gregory's time.
common use to our own day, but in commercial affairs it is there
 g.
4/16, and at the present time strenuous exertions are making in that
exclusion of the Julian one.

abbreviations O.
 and N.
, old style, new style, and as the older
 S.
convenient to transform a date from the one calendar to the other.
is readily done by the formula
    G = J + (N - 2) - N/4,
where _G_ and _J_ are the respective dates, _N_ is the number of the
 For
 S.

 3
    - N/4 = -  4
        G = Sept.

September 3, 1752, O.
 Columbus discovered America on October 12,
 S.

 THE DAY OF THE WEEK.
complicated consists in finding the day of the week on which any given
 g.

The formula for this case is
    7q + r = Y + D + (Y - 1)/4 - (Y - 1)/100 + (Y - 1)/400
where _Y_ denotes the given year, _D_ the number of the day (date) in
remainder obtained by dividing the second member of the equation by 7.
If _r_ = 1 the date falls on Sunday, etc.
Saturday.

  31
  29
  31
      May   31
      July  31
  31
 30
  21
       D = 295
                  Y =  1492
    + (Y - 1) ÷   4 = + 372
    + (Y - 1) ÷ 400 = +   3
                    7) 2148
                  _q_ =   306

Find from some history the day of the week on which Columbus first saw

On what day of the week did last Christmas fall? On what day of the week
the coefficient 7? What principles in the calendar give rise to the

the lapse of time the student may consult the articles Calendar and

[Illustration: THE YERKES OBSERVATORY, WILLIAMS BAY, WIS.


CHAPTER VII
ECLIPSES

 THE NATURE OF ECLIPSES.
with the planet along its orbit, always pointing directly away from the
otherwise would fill it.
but occasionally one of them falls upon a planet or some other body
light, produces the striking phenomenon which we call an eclipse.
satellites of Jupiter, Saturn, and Mars are eclipsed whenever they
himself is partially eclipsed when one of his own satellites passes
small to cover more than a fraction of it.

called respectively solar and lunar eclipses.
 33 the full moon,
eclipsed, and in the same figure the new moon, _M_, is shown as casting
 From a
can occur only at new moon--i.
, when the moon is on line between the

appearance from every part of the earth where it is at all visible--the
will present very different aspects from different parts of the earth.
Thus, at _L_, within the moon's shadow, the sunlight will be entirely
 At points of the
with the sunlight, and no eclipse, since the moon is quite off the line
 At places between _J_ and
not all of it, and will produce what is called a partial eclipse, which,
lower (southern) part of the sun, and as seen from the southern

[Illustration: FIG.
--Different kinds of eclipse.

suppose to be perpendicular to the surface of the paper, and to pass
 But it frequently
such line as _P Q_, and in this case the full moon would cut through the
it, giving a partial eclipse of the moon, as is shown in the figure.

solar eclipse would be produced by the new moon at _Q_? In what parts of

 THE SHADOW CONE.
indicated in Fig.
represent the sun and earth, since it is only between these lines that
sun and earth are spheres, and the earth is much the smaller of the two,
a cone whose base is at the earth, and whose vertex lies far to the
long, tapers off finally to a point and ends.
moon is a cone, having its base at the moon and its vertex turned away
reach the earth.

with the known size of the earth and sun, that the distance from the
distance of the earth from the sun divided by 108, and, similarly, that
from the sun divided by 400, the moon's shadow being the smaller and
 The
the earth's orbit--i.
, the distance of the moon from the earth is
"chance" agreement between the length of the moon's shadow and the
shadow fall very near the earth at the time of solar eclipses.
the elliptical shape of the moon's orbit produces considerable
consequence of these variations the vertex of the shadow sometimes falls
beyond its farther side.
shadow to bridge the space between earth and moon there can be no total
earth, even though the moon does come directly between earth and sun.
But there is then produced a peculiar kind of partial eclipse called
central parts of the sun, is not large enough to cover the whole of it,
surrounds the moon.
eclipse, it is customary to put total and annular eclipses together in
line of centers of sun and moon strikes the earth, while in ordinary

_penumbra_--i.
, partial shadow--which is shown in Fig.
broken lines tangent to the sun and moon, and crossing at the point _V_,
 This penumbral cone includes within
of the sunlight, and of course it includes the shadow cone which
 Wherever the penumbra falls there will be a
the penumbra, the more nearly total will be the eclipse.
stands about midway between the earth and the vertex of the penumbra,
twice as great as the diameter of the moon, and the student should be
which a partial solar eclipse is visible extends in a straight line
total.
frequently much greater.

2,100 miles of the earth's surface a partial eclipse will be visible in

 DIFFERENT CHARACTERISTICS OF LUNAR AND SOLAR ECLIPSES.
difference between lunar and solar eclipses which has been already
 33.
seen eclipsed from every part of the earth where it is visible at all at
earth; while the eclipsed sun will be seen eclipsed only from those
penumbra falls.
than reaches to the earth, the amount of space upon the earth which it
miles in length, and it is only within the space thus actually covered
within this region the sun disappears, absolutely, behind the solid body
are too large for the moon to cover.
hand, the earth coming between sun and moon cuts off the light from the
the moon disappears altogether from sight even in mid-eclipse.
explanation of this continued visibility is furnished by the broken
 33, from the earth through the moon.
represent sunlight, which, entering the earth's atmosphere near the edge
emerges in a changed direction, refracted, into the shadow cone and
shown in our red sunsets.
sun's light shines through dense layers of air it is the red rays which
clear sunset something which corresponds exactly to the bending of the
its disk is distorted from a circle into an oval whose horizontal

QUERY.
appearance of the moon if the atmosphere around the edge of the earth

 THE TRACK OF THE SHADOW.
huge pencil attached to the moon, moving with it along its orbit in the
 34), and as it moves drawing a black
 This
which the eclipse will be total at some stage of its progress.
point of the shadow just reaches the earth its trace will have no
be broken off, and, like a blunt pencil, it will draw a broad streak
have a breadth of a little more than 160 miles and a length of 10,000 or
 The student should be able to show from the known distance
new moons (29.
the earth at the rate of 2,100 miles per hour, and that in a general way
moon's motion in its orbit.
shadow moves past a given station may, however, be considerably greater
obliquely, as when the eclipse occurs near sunrise or sunset, the
of the moon which produces it, and on the other hand the earth in
he stands along the same direction in which the shadow is moving.
equator, with the sun and moon overhead, this motion of the earth
shadow passes by.
with which the shadow passes by, that total solar eclipses last longer
favorable circumstances the duration of totality does not reach eight
to sweep the entire length of its path across the earth.

eclipse is 7m.
, and it can attain this limit only when the eclipse
the equator.

moon with respect to the earth's shadow.
centrally, as at _M´_, Fig.
hours, with an additional hour at the beginning and end, during which
 If the moon meets
eclipse may fail altogether, and between these extremes the duration of

[Illustration: FIG.
--Relation of the lunar nodes to eclipses.

 RELATION OF THE LUNAR NODES TO ECLIPSES.
sometimes encounters the earth's shadow centrally and more frequently at
 34,
dates showing the time in each year at which the earth passes the part
 The orbit of the moon about the earth, _M M´_,
earth and the full moon, _M´_, apparently immersed in the earth's
 But here appearances are deceptive, and the student who has
a fact of which careful account must now be taken.
the moon and sun among the stars are great circles which lie near each
only the intersections of the sky with the planes of the earth's orbit
each other and must therefore intersect along some line passing through
 This line, _N´ N´´_, is shown in the figure,
earth's orbit, we shall have to suppose the moon's orbit to be tipped
right side below the surface of the paper.
lies in the plane of its orbit--i.
, in the surface of the paper--the
moon, _M_, must have cast its shadow above the earth, so that neither a
 But toward the end
_N´ N´´_ points almost directly toward the sun, in line with the shadow
 Note that the line _N´ N´´_ remains very nearly
orbit.
close to the plane of the earth's orbit, if not actually in it, and must
 So also the new
falling upon the earth, produced the total solar eclipse of May 28,

_N´ N´´_ is called the line of nodes of the moon's orbit (§ 39), and the
other, at which _N´ N´´_ points exactly toward the sun, we shall call
 Strictly speaking, the nodes are those
moment when in its orbital motion it cuts through the plane of the
 Bearing in mind these definitions, we may condense much
can occur only when the earth is at or near one of the nodes of the
 Corresponding to these positions of the earth there are in
these only, eclipses can occur.
these two points on June 2d and November 24th respectively, and the
them were within a few days of one or the other of these dates:
        _Eclipses of the Year 1900_
    Total solar eclipse          May 28th.
    Partial lunar eclipse        June 12th.
    Annular (solar) eclipse      November 21st.

 ECLIPSE LIMITS.
new moon, the moon's shadow will fall centrally upon it and will produce
the earth's surface nearest the plane of its orbit.
but not at the node, the new moon will stand a little north or south of
farther north or south than before, producing an eclipse in the
below the earth, producing no eclipse whatever, or at most a partial
 Just how many days' motion
in the following brief table of eclipse limits, as they are called:
                  _Solar Eclipse Limits_
  If at any new moon the earth is
  Less than 10 days away from a node, a central eclipse is certain.
  Between 10 and 16 days   "  "  "    some kind of eclipse is certain.
  Between 16 and 19 days   "  "  "    a partial eclipse is possible.
  More than 19 days        "  "  "    no eclipse is possible.







From this table of eclipse limits we may draw some interesting

69.
--Whenever the earth passes a node of
days that the earth remains inside the limits where some kind of eclipse
the earth passes a node of the moon's orbit.
nodes past which the earth moves at least once in each year, there must
 Can there be more than two?

since it is quite possible that no full moon should occur during the 20
eastern limit.
the eclipse limits sometimes happens at both nodes in the same year, and
 The student may note in
12th occurred 10 days after the earth passed the node, and was therefore
corresponding to this position the eclipse was a very small one, only a
earth.
in which no lunar eclipse occurred.

before or after a total eclipse of the sun, since the full moon will
 A partial eclipse
eclipse of the moon.

 35.
]
70.
--It is the custom of astronomers to prepare, in
moon's shadow across the earth, and indicating the times of beginning
 35.
construction of such a map requires much technical knowledge, the
the center of sun and moon is the axis of the shadow cone, and the map
this cone meets the surface of the earth.
Total Eclipse" is the trace of the shadow cone across the face of the
shadow considerably inside the vertex of the cone.
of the path is from west to east, and the slight sinuousities which it
map caused by the attempt to represent the curved surface of the earth
 On either side of the Path of Total
broken lines marked Begins at 3h.
, show the intersection of
 M.
time.
which at that time any eclipse whatever could be seen, and at this
eastern edge of the penumbra and just ending at every point on the
Eclipse, lay the shadow of the moon, an oval patch whose greatest
lay every part of the earth where the eclipse was total at that moment.

although with more distortion, because it then meets the surface of the
of beginning and end of the eclipse at any desired place, and to
much of the sun's face was obscured.

London, and Algiers.

places at which the penumbral cone first touched the earth and finally
 According to computations made as a basis for the construction
 12.
 and of
 35.
, and the difference between these two times
 e.
23.

[Illustration: FIG.
--Central eclipses for the first two decades of
 OPPOLZER.

 FUTURE ECLIPSES.
Fig.
of the sun, visible during the period 1900-1918 A.
, in those parts of
 Each continuous black line
sunrise, at the western end of the line to its end, sunset, at the
place at which the eclipse was total at noon.
similar data for the annular eclipses.
prepared by the Austrian astronomer, Oppolzer, showing the path of every
 C.
 D.
than three thousand years.

that they are not limited to the particular seasons, May and November,
the months of the year, from January to December.
that the line of nodes, _N´ N´´_, of Fig.
position, but turns round in the plane of the earth's orbit so that in
 The
the slow rotation of the earth's axis, producing a corresponding
intersect; and in much the same way, through the disturbing influence of
opposite to the arrowheads in Fig.
year, so that the earth comes to each node about 19 days earlier in each
comes on the average about 19 days earlier than in the year before,
particular years.

 RECURRENCE OF ECLIPSES.
astronomers had found out a rough-and-ready method of predicting
 The substance of the
 g.
of May 28, 1900--and reckon forward or backward from that date a period
similar in its general characteristics to the one with which we started.
Thus, from the map of eclipses (Fig.
eclipse will occur on June 8, 1918, 18 years and 11 days after the one
 35.
_saros_, an ancient word which means cycle or repetition, and since
dates of all the eclipses of 1918 by adding 11 days to the dates given
noted that each eclipse of 1918 will be like its predecessor of 1900 in
 The eclipses of any year
years earlier.

The exact length of a saros is 223 lunar months, each of which is a
5 days long, and if we multiply the exact value of
6,585.
32 days when there are four
32 days when the number of
eclipses, due heed must be paid to the number of intervening leap years.
To explain why eclipses are repeated at the end of the saros, we note
positions of the earth, moon, and node of the moon's orbit, and the
position which first produced it.
saros, since the saros is, approximately, the least common multiple of
time required by the line of nodes to make a complete revolution around
 If the saros were exactly a multiple of these three
thousands of years; but such is not the case, the saros is not an exact
a revolution of the line of nodes, and in consequence the restitution
 The earth at
relative to the node, than it was at the beginning, and the resulting
 After
from the node than at first, and the eclipse differs still more in
 This is shown in Fig.
positions of the disks of the sun and moon as seen from the center of
of figures represents the number of repetitions of the eclipse from the
 The solar eclipse limits, 10,
the 10-day limits will be central as seen from some part of the earth,
they may be either total or partial.
following description given by Professor Newcomb: "A series of such

central near the same pole.
recur, the central line moving slowly toward the other pole.
will then become partial, and finally cease.
series will be more than a thousand years.
the average, at intervals of thirty years.

 37.
]
A similar figure may be constructed to represent the recurrence of lunar
shall find that a series is of shorter duration, a little over eight
duration of a series of solar eclipses.

 During
32 days the earth has 6,585 times turned toward the
the saros, but at the end of the saros the odd 0.
earth time to make about a third of a revolution more before the eclipse
region of the earth, on the average about 116° farther west in
 Compare in Fig.
and 1918 are visible.

of lunar eclipses as well as solar?
73.
--At all times and among all peoples eclipses, and
most impressive phenomena of Nature.
uncultivated people they were usually regarded with apprehension, often
scrupled to use for their own purposes with the aid of the eclipse
to destroy the sun or moon, and pointing to the advancing eclipse as
 In our own day and our own land
eclipses are now awaited with an interest and pleasure which, contrasted
illustrations of the effect of scientific knowledge in transforming

But to the astronomer an eclipse is more than a beautiful illustration
of adding to his store of knowledge respecting the heavenly bodies.
region immediately surrounding the sun is at most times closed to
as large as the moon might exist here unseen were it not for the
excessive light and permits not only a search for unknown planets but
 More than
one of these has found a name and a description in some of the books,
existence of any such object of considerable size, although there is
in size from grains of sand upward, do move in this region, as yet

But in other directions the study of this region at the times of total
shall have to consider the marvelous appearances presented by the solar
from his surface for millions of miles but is never seen save at an
 Photographs of the corona are taken by astronomers at every
X.

consequence, but any recorded eclipse may become of value in connection
 We date our letters in a particular year of the
the birth of Christ; but this is an error, for the eclipses which were
of his life, when examined by the astronomers are found quite
 They are, however, reconciled with
the birth of Christ, or, in other words, that Christ was born in the
 C.
was introduced into chronology.
of an eclipse in the early annals of civilization furnishes a similar
to events long past.


CHAPTER VIII
INSTRUMENTS AND THE PRINCIPLES INVOLVED IN THEIR USE

 TWO FAMILIAR INSTRUMENTS.
clock and a divided circle (protractor) are needed for the observations
geography of the sky and the science of celestial motions depend
 The protractor is a simple
labor and ingenuity have been expended on this family to make possible
may be measured to the tenth of a second instead of to the tenth of a
 e.

The building of a good clock is equally important and has cost a like
discovery that a pendulum "keeps time" to the modern clock with its
influences of every kind.
nutmeg variety which sells for a dollar, or whether it be the standard
parts that fall naturally into four classes, which we may compare with
 A timekeeping department,
duration.
 A power department, the weights or mainspring, which,
piecemeal as required to keep the first department running.
 A
furnished by Department I.
 A transportation department, the wheels,
and time from one to the other.
merely the roof which shelters it and forms no department of its
 Of these departments the first is by far the most important,


75.
--But we have now to consider other instruments which
employed.
telescope, the spectroscope, and the photographic camera; and since all
earth, we must for their proper understanding take account of the nature
radiant energy emitted by the sun and stars, which energy, coming from
of light and heat.
fundamentally different from that of the sun, but the amount of energy
our nerves any sensible perception of heat, and for the same reason the
furnish a sufficient amount of energy to affect the optic nerves.
brick taken into the hand reveals its presence by the two different
to produce the two sensations, so there is only one energy to produce
and heat, and this energy is called _radiant_ because it appears to
it.
that branch of science called physics; but some of its elementary
the student should not fail to perform for himself:
Drop a bullet or other similar object into a bucket of water and observe
water.
light or heat in that they are visibly confined to a single plane, the

the bullet, etc.
produced; but every such set of waves may be described and defined in
, the
wave from the next; and the velocity with which the waves travel across
 The last of these quantities is called the velocity of
is called the amplitude; and all these terms find important applications

The energy of the falling bullet, the disturbance which it produced on
of the bucket but not beyond, for the wave can go only so far as the
 The transfer of energy in this way requires a perfectly
visible universe is supposed to be filled with something called _ether_,
energy just as the water in the experiment served as a medium for

waves through the ether, every glowing body, such as a star, a candle
, being the origin and center of
properties the wave length and amplitude of the wave systems given off.

corresponding vibration, and its color depends upon the wave length.
ingenious devices which need not be here described it has been found
colors--e.
, all of the colors of the rainbow, and some of these wave
length obtained by dividing a meter into 10^{10} equal parts.
10,000,000,000.

               Wave length.

    Middle of the violet                 4,060
      "      "    green                  5,270
      "      "    orange                 5,970
    Extreme limit of visible red         7,600
[Illustration: PLATE I.

understood to mean that in general the eye is not able to detect radiant
meters.
shorter length than the above, and may be readily detected by apparatus
 g.
thermometer will show a rise of temperature when its bulb is exposed to
and a photographic plate will be strongly affected by energy of

76.
--When the waves produced by
they appear to rebound and are reflected back toward the center, and if
waves will meet simultaneously at this point and produce there by their
of the bucket.
reflection, and this increased energy is shown by the greater amplitude
 The student should not fail to notice that each portion of
that they meet simultaneously at the center because of this equality of
required to go out and back.
the center, would the reflected waves produce _at any point_ a

the bullet were dropped at one focus of the ellipse there would be
the sum of the paths traversed by each portion of the wave before and
other portion, and all parts of the wave reach the second focus at the
 Upon what geometrical principle does this depend?
The condensation of wave energy in the circular and elliptical buckets
will be produced at any point which is so placed that different parts of
other means, as shown below.

say _wave front_ instead of wave.
along the crest, so as to touch every drop which at that moment is
similarly a line drawn through the trough between two waves, or through

77.
--That form of radiant energy which we recognize
waves of water in the exercise considered above, but owing to the
should be very smooth and highly polished.
in the center by grinding, and with a light film of silver chemically
by astronomers for this purpose, and is called a concave mirror.

falling upon the silvered face of such a mirror is reflected and
image of the star, which may be seen with the unaided eye, if it is held

object is formed by the mirror, which condenses at its appropriate place
of the object, and this, in common phrase, produces an image of the

Another device more frequently used by astronomers for the production of
a round piece of glass, thick in the center and thin at the edge, with a
 38.
D_ to represent a small part of a wave front coming from a very distant
practically a plane surface represented by the straight line _E D_, but
travels slower in glass than in air, and the central part of the beam,
lens, more than _E_ or _D_ will be retarded by the comparatively thin
 On the right of the lens the wave front therefore
upon the shape of the lens and the kind of glass of which it is made.
properly choosing these the new wave front may be made a part of a
wave front, _E G D_, will then be condensed at _F_, because this point
therefore is in a position to receive them simultaneously.
of _F_ from _A B_ is called the focal length of the lens, and _F_ itself
 The significance of this last word (Latin, _focus_
hold a common reading glass between his hand and the sun in such a way

[Illustration: FIG.
--Illustrating the theory of lenses.

concentrated upon a very small area at _F_, and an image of the
 g.
 Other
along slightly different directions to the lens, and these will be
_F H_, passed through the focus, _F_, perpendicular to the line, _F G_,
objects within the range of the lens.

 39.
]
78.
--The simplest kind of telescope consists of a concave
through which to examine them; but for convenience' sake, so that the
added to this combination, as at _H_ in Fig.
represent the directions along which the energy is propagated.
reflection from this mirror the focal plane and the images are shifted
glass _E_.

 40.
]
Such a combination of parts is called a _reflecting_ telescope, while
is called a _refracting_ telescope, the adjective having reference to
which the energy is propagated.
such a telescope is shown in Fig.
called the objective and _V E_ (the magnifying glass) is the eyepiece,

Most objects with which we have to deal in using a telescope send to it
many different wave lengths, some of which are refracted more than
these different amounts of refraction a single lens does not furnish a
and blue images much inferior in sharpness of outline (definition) to
 To remedy this defect it is
different densities and ground to different shapes as is shown at _O_ in
 40.
compound lens having its own focal plane, shown at _F_ in the figure,
between the eyepiece and the objective which must also fall at _F_, and
its focal plane coincides with that of the objective.
which is called focusing, is what is accomplished in the ordinary opera
carefully done with every telescope in order to obtain distinct vision.

 MAGNIFYING POWER.
depends upon the focal length of the objective (or mirror) and the focal
quantities.
 40 the distance of the objective from the focal
from the same plane, and the magnifying power of this telescope is
 A magnifying power of 16 diameters means that
as it appears without the telescope, and is nearly equivalent to saying
 Sometimes the
an object seems increased; and since areas are proportional to the
a power of 256.
of different focal lengths, ranging from a quarter of an inch to two and
may be required for the different kinds of work undertaken with the
 Higher powers can be used with large telescopes than with
eyepiece giving a higher power than 60 diameters for each inch of

The part played by the eyepiece in determining magnifying power will be

 Bring a printed page so close
place the pin hole between the eye and the page.
before blurred may now be seen plainly through the pin hole, even when
 As it is brought
they are nearer.
eyepiece in a telescope plays the same part as does the pin hole in the
the shorter the focal length of the eyepiece the nearer is the eye

80.
--Telescopes are of all sizes, from the
no other support than the hand, to the giant which must have a special
toward the sky.
consists of the following parts, which are illustrated, with exception
 41.
is not customary to place a driving clock on so small a telescope as


(_b_) An axis placed parallel to the axis of the earth.

_b_ as an axle.

_c_.

which the telescope is turned on these axes.

revolve about _b_ with an angular velocity equal and opposite to that

[Illustration: FIG.
--A simple equatorial mounting.

 42.
the Yerkes Observatory.

note from the figure that the circles, _e_, measure the hour angle and
conversely if the telescope be so set that these circles indicate the
point toward that star.
telescope any moderately bright star, even in broad daylight, although
 The rotation of the
star, but if the driving clock be started, its effect is to turn the
it toward the east, and by these compensating motions to keep it
 In Fig.
one of the most perfect refracting telescopes ever built, let the
described.
the pier.
 43 trace out the corresponding parts in the mounting

[Illustration: FIG.
--The reflecting telescope of the Paris
]
A telescope is often only a subordinate part of some instrument or
requirements of the special case; but when the telescope is the chief
equatorial mounting is almost always adopted, although sometimes the
those shown above.
in front of a telescope can be seen by an observer at the eyepiece.
numerous stories of astronomers who saw spiders crawling over the
objects in the sky, are all fictitious, since nothing on or near the

81.
--A photographic camera consists of a lens and a device
 This plate
light, and which may be made to preserve the imprint of any picture
 If such a sensitive plate is placed at the
available for astronomical photography, and at the present time the
substitute the sensitive plate in place of the observer at a telescope.
A refracting telescope may also be used for astronomical photography,
the resolution of the light into its constituent colors in passing
 Fig.
telescopes, one photographic, the other visual, supported side by side

[Illustration: FIG.
--Photographic telescope of the Paris
]
One of the great advantages of photography is found in connection with

 PERSONAL EQUATION.
the German astronomer Bessel, three quarters of a century ago, that
implicitly relied upon.
exactly in their measurement of an angle or in estimating the exact
can not draw identical pictures of the same object, etc.

equation_, which is a famous phrase in astronomy, denoting that the
some equation involving his personality.

equation, and it was in reference to such matters that one of the most
of observing:
"In order to avoid every physiological disturbance, I have adopted the
every laborious occupation; never to go to the telescope with stomach
nervous system, from narcotics and alcohol, and especially from the
accuracy of observation.
athletic contest rather than for the more quiet labors of an astronomer.


83.
--The photographic plate has no stomach
inhere in visual observations, and in special classes of work it
to be dealt with simultaneously, permanence of record, and owing to the
photograph with a given telescope stars far too faint to be seen through
 On the other hand, the eye has the advantage in some respects, such
 g.
surface of a planet, or the sun's corona and, for the present at least,
 For a remarkable case
observations compare the pictures of the great nebula in the
 A partial
is most strongly affected by greenish-yellow light, while the
photograph, therefore, represents things which the eye has little

84.
--In some respects the spectroscope is the exact
 The latter condenses radiant energy and
 As a measuring instrument the telescope is
different colors of which that light is composed affect it only as an
 On the other hand, with the
minor consequence, and the all-important consideration is the intrinsic
 What colors are present in the light and in
and condition of the body from which they come, be it sun, or star, or
or a furnace in blast? These are some of the characteristic questions of
analyzing the radiant energy into its component parts, setting down the
another, etc.
principles which we shall have to consider.
color analysis may be seen in the brilliant hues shown by a soap bubble,
exhibited in the rainbow, produced by raindrops which break up the
appropriate place.
might be employed in the construction of a spectroscope, but in
sources, such as a star, or a candle flame, a glass prism of triangular
component colors, which it does by refracting it as shown at the edges
 38.

 45.
]
The course of a beam of light in passing through such a prism is shown
 45.
into a new one, which is here shown as produced by the prism, is quite
same cause, the slower velocity of light in glass than in air.
the light-waves as long to move over the path _A B_ in glass as over the
the glass.

bends in different degree light of different colors, as is shown in the
up of a mixture of blue and red light, while at the right of the prism
so that they fall at different places on the screen, _S S_.
light has been analyzed into its constituents, and in the same way every
and a beam of white light falling upon the prism would be resolved by it
orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet.
these names make the word _Roygbiv_, and by means of it their order is

[Illustration: FIG.
--Principal parts of a spectroscope.

by the prism is complete, and when viewed through a telescope the image
called a _spectrum_, and is red at one end and violet or blue at the
between these extremes.
a telescope is called an objective prism, and has been used for stellar
 But if the
of surface, such as the sun or a planet, the objective prism can not be
own spectrum, and these will appear in the _view telescope_ superposed
 To avoid
light an opaque screen, _S_, with a very narrow slit cut in it, through
lens, _A_, placed between the slit and the prism, as shown in Fig.

supported, are called a _collimator_.
amount of light is permitted to pass from the object through the slit
effect a series of images of the slit in light of different colors,
of light whose width is the length of each individual picture of the
 The length of the ribbon (dispersion) depends mainly upon the
be very greatly increased and the efficiency of the spectroscope
one above described.
case of the sun or an electric arc lamp, it is advantageous to alter
of the prism a grating--i.
, a metallic mirror with a great number of
another.
mother-of-pearl displays its beautiful color effects, and a brilliant
ruled with from 10,000 to 20,000 lines to the inch.
 47 represents,
a grating, or rather it shows three different spectra arranged side by
 The sides of the ladder
the cross pieces are the spectrum of the electric arc filling the space
 Fig.
into a region where the radiant energy is invisible to the eye, but is

[Illustration: FIG.
--Green and blue part of the spectrum of an
]
It is only when a lens is placed between the lamp and the slit of the
as in the figure.
lamp upon the slit, so that all the radiant energy from any one point of
resulting spectrum separated from the energy which comes from every
 Such an instrument is called an _analyzing
spectroscope_, since it furnishes to each point of the slit a sample of
thus produces only an average spectrum of that source without
 When a spectroscope is attached to a
 49), the eyepiece is removed to
analyzing lens.
to photograph the spectra it furnishes, and the whole instrument is then

[Illustration: FIG.
--Violet and ultraviolet parts of spectrum of
]
[Illustration: FIG.
--A spectroscope attached to the Yerkes
]
85.
--Having seen the mechanism of the spectroscope by
and drawn out into a series of colors arranged in the order of their
placed upon the various kinds of spectra which may be seen, and here we
as follows:
The radiant energy which is analyzed by the spectroscope has its source
the energy is radiated, and these atoms and molecules are able to
different length and amplitude.
conditions of the experiment different kinds of waves may be produced in
to the conditions which produced them, so the study of the waves
information about the molecules which make up that source.
molecules of iron produce a system of waves peculiar to themselves and
off its own peculiar type of energy, presenting a limited and definite
molecules.
characteristic fashion without disturbance or crowding, they emit light
bright lines, pictures of the slit produced by light of these particular
the absence from the radiant energy of light of intermediate wave
 Such a spectrum is shown in the central portion of Fig.
which, as we have already seen, is produced by the space between the
 On the other hand, if the molecules are closely
give off a jumble of energy of all wave lengths, and this is translated
spaces intervening, as in the upper and lower parts of Figs.
produced by the incandescent solid carbons of the lamp.
are known as the continuous and discontinuous spectrum, and we may lay

called, indicates that the molecules of the source of light are not
gas.
together, or are so numerous that the body to which they belong is not
 The body may be solid,
considerable pressure or of great extent.

characteristic of the source from which the light came--e.
, the
Fig.
is never produced by anything but sodium.
we have learned the particular set of lines corresponding to iron, we
iron is present in the source from which the light came, whether that
distant.
light, and there is no reason to suppose that nature to be altered on
 It may, however, be altered by something
 g.
or pressure may affect, and does affect, the spectrum which such a
substance presenting different spectra under different conditions, only
changes in the spectrum.

 50.
sunlight.
]
86.
--To identify a line as belonging to and produced by
 e.
wave length--must be very accurately determined, and for the
necessary to determine accurately the wave lengths of many lines.
complicated spectrum may consist of hundreds or thousands of lines, due
unless great care is taken in assigning the exact position of these
result.
(§ 75) is the unit employed, and a scale of wave lengths expressed in
 50.
wave lengths are determined is truly astounding; a ten-billionth of an
the color of any part of the spectrum, and pictures of spectra for

87.
--There is another kind of spectrum, of greater
illustrated by the spectrum of sunlight (Fig.
 This is a nearly
of radiant energy in a comparatively cool gas through which it passes on
 Fraunhofer, who made the first careful
by letters of the alphabet which are shown in the plate, and which are
sunlight but wherever they occur in other spectra.
marked _D_, wave length 5893, falls at precisely the same place in the
the yellow part of the arc-light spectrum, which line is also called _D_
spectrum.

Fig.
possible, he should make the transition from one color to the next a

Fig.
sunlight.
the left into regions invisible to the human eye, but within the limits
literally thousands upon thousands of lines, of which only the most

The dark lines which appear in the spectrum of sunlight can, under
and Fig.
spectrum adjacent to the _D_ (sodium) lines.
these lines runs a black streak whose position (wave length) is
presence is explained as follows:
The very hot sodium vapor at the center of the arc gives off its
of sodium vapor, is partially absorbed by these, resulting in a fine
bright lines, and seen against these as a background, since the higher
and make them diffuse.
sun (Fig.
relatively cool gases, which absorb from the sunlight precisely those
incandescent.
interpreted by the same set of principles which we have above applied to
determine the chemical composition of the sun, just as the bright lines

spectra are sometimes called respectively _emission_ and _absorption_

[Illustration: FIG.
--The lines reversed.

 TYPES OF SPECTRUM.
spectrum known, and Fig.
conspicuous lines which appear in it.
appear relatively simple, since their feeble light is insufficient to
 In Chapters XIII and XIV there are shown types
be interpreted by the principles above established.
the bright star β Aurigæ shows a continuous spectrum crossed by a few
produced only by hydrogen.
relatively cool hydrogen surrounding this star.
is quite similar to that of the sun and is to be interpreted as showing
Herculis is quite different from either of the others.
chapters we shall have occasion to consider more fully these different

89.
--This important principle of the spectrum

how the pitch changes and the note becomes more grave as the locomotive
 During the approach of the whistle
the ear of the listener than had its predecessor, and in consequence the
a correspondingly shorter wave length than would be heard if the same
 On the other hand, the
receding motion of the whistle.
wave length of light by a rapid change of distance between the source
diminishing distance diminishes very slightly the wave length of every
increases these wave lengths, and this holds true whether the change of
the instrument which receives it.

body is rapidly approaching, the lines of its spectrum are all displaced
toward the red end by a receding motion.
when it can be measured, measures the velocity of the body along the
only in recent years that it has been found possible to make them with
 For this purpose there is made to pass through the
chemical elements known to be present in the star which is to be
in the spectrum of the star are examined to determine whether they
displacement, as if one spectrum had been slipped past the other.
difficulty of the observations lies in the extremely small amount of
to one sixth part of the interval between the close parallel lines
 50.
a locomotive running at the rate of a hundred miles per hour would be
between the _D_ lines, an amount absolutely imperceptible in the most
 But many of the celestial bodies
may be detected and measured by means of the Doppler principle.

 OTHER INSTRUMENTS.
astronomer, but of which only casual mention can here be made, are the
 52, and
observations similar in kind to those which the student has already
pre-eminently the sailor's instrument for finding the latitude and
sea horizon; the heliometer, which serves for the very accurate
stars not more than one or two degrees apart; and the photometer, which
bodies.

 52.
telescope.


CHAPTER IX
THE MOON

 RESULTS OF OBSERVATION WITH THE UNAIDED EYE.
made the observations of the moon which are indicated in Chapter III has

the moon among the stars, always from west toward east, accompanied by
quarter, full moon, etc.
words, the phase of the moon.
should be able to verify, at least approximately, the following
of them can be reached only by more elaborate apparatus and longer study

 The phase of the moon depends upon the distance apart of sun and moon
they are as far apart as possible.

 From a photograph
]
B.
its own, but shining solely by reflected sunlight.
that whenever we see a part of the moon which is turned away from the
 g.
same direction from us and we see little or nothing of the moon, since
 At full moon
bright, the face upon which the sun shines.
quarters, the moon turns toward the earth a part of its night hemisphere
belongs to the day side of the moon is visible and the peculiar curved
is called, is the dividing line between day and night upon the moon.

moon when the moon and sun are not very far apart in the sky, for then
brightly illuminated by the sun and the larger part feebly illuminated
to the moon, giving the pleasing effect which is sometimes called the
 The new moon--i.
, the part illumined
the old moon, but this is purely a trick played by the eyes of the
 Is there

 The moon makes the circuit of the sky from a given star around to the
32166), but the
 e.
sun again--is more than 29 days (29.
 This last interval, which is
learned before--that the sun has changed its place among the stars
overtake him after having made the circuit of the sky, just as it takes
hand after having made a complete circuit of the dial.

 Wherever the moon may be in the sky, it turns always the same face
appear on its surface stand always upon (nearly) the same part of its
 It does not always turn the same face toward the sun, for the
shifts from one side to the other as the phase changes, dividing at each
progress that upon the moon the day and the month are of equal length
5 terrestrial days), instead of being time units of different

[Illustration: FIG.
--Motion of moon and earth relative to the sun.

 THE MOON'S MOTION.
own observations, as well as the preceding section, with Fig.
which the lines with dates printed on them are all supposed to radiate
moon upon the given dates which are arbitrarily assumed for the sake of
 The black dots, small
circular path shown in Fig.
forward motion into the peculiar sinuous line here shown.
to both earth and sun, the moon's orbit deviates but little from a
 53 follows very closely the
 For
figure has been made ten times too great, and to get a proper idea of
moved up toward the earth until its distance from the line of the
 When
of the earth, as may be seen in the figure, where the attempt has been
real orbit of the moon is everywhere concave toward the sun.

indicated by the row of circles at the right, and the student should
July 15th, etc.

 53 another effect of the same kind as that noted
 Between noon, June 30th, and noon, July 3d, the earth makes
the meridian which points toward the moon at noon on June 30th will not
position and is now 37° away from the meridian.
measuring, in Fig.
from the meridian at noon on July 3d.
the moon?
93.
--The interval between two successive transits of the
show from the figure that on the average a lunar day is 51 minutes
 e.
to the meridian 51 minutes of solar time later than on the day before.
It is also true that on the average the moon rises and sets 51 minutes
 But there is a good deal of
since the time of rising depends largely upon the particular point of
may change so much on account of the moon's orbital motion as to make
 In
September, when the eastern horizon is nearly parallel with the moon's
the moon rises on several successive nights at nearly the same hour, and
 This highly convenient
to be christened respectively the Harvest Moon and the Hunter's Moon.

 SIZE AND MASS OF THE MOON.
distance of the moon from the earth may be measured and its diameter
these observations, we note as their result that the moon is a globe
240,000 miles.
changes to the extent of a few thousand miles, sometimes less, sometimes
about the earth, but also in part from the disturbing influence of other
forward, to quite an appreciable extent.

geometry to derive in miles the area of its surface and its volume or
 Leaving this as an exercise for the student, we adopt
the moon is rather more than a quarter, 4/15, that of the earth, the
its volume a little more than 1/49 of the earth's.
geometry, but we may combine with it some mechanical principles which
 e.
its mass and the average density of the material of which it is made.

little from the smooth curve shown in Fig.
the direction of motion, and it would follow absolutely such a smooth
some of the other planets, which swing it about first to one side then
 But action and reaction are equal; the moon pulls as
and moon were of equal mass, the deviation of the earth from the smooth
 It is
curve, and we have only to measure the amount of this displacement of
find how much the mass of the one exceeds that of the other.
seen from the figure that at first quarter, about July 7th, the earth is
quarter, July 22d, it is pulled back by the action of the moon, and at
to be strictly correct, we must amend our former statement about the
revolve around a point on line between their centers.
called their _center of gravity_, and the earth and the moon both move
 Compare
 These ellipses are similarly shaped, but
(Chapter IV), so that the action of the earth in causing the small moon
in causing the larger earth to move in the smaller orbit.
equivalent to saying that the dimensions of the two orbits are inversely

By observing throughout the month the direction from the earth to the
determined that the diameter of the ellipse in which the earth moves is
gravity is 2,925 miles, and the distance of the moon from it is
 We may now write in the form of a proportion--
    Mass of earth : Mass of moon :: 237,075 : 2,925,
and find from it that the mass of the earth is 81 times as great as the
 e.
is enough material in the earth to make 81 moons.
connection that the diameter of the earth, 7,926 miles, is greater than
and therefore the center of gravity of earth and moon always lies inside

95.
--It is believed that in a general way the moon
earth--metals, minerals, rocks, etc.
which this belief is based lies in the density of the moon.
of a substance we mean the amount of it which is contained in a given
 e.
stuff.
because a cubic centimeter of chalk weighs twice as much as an equal
dividing the mass or weight of the body by the mass or weight of an

We know the mass of the earth (§ 45), and knowing the mass of a cubic
would be the mass of a volume of water equal in size to the earth.
quotient obtained by dividing one of these masses by the other (mass of
the earth, and we find numerically that this is 5.
 e.
take 5.
 From
rocks which make up the crust of the earth is only about half of this,
the surface parts, as we should expect them to be, because they have to

Turning now to the moon, we find in the same way as for the earth that
4 as great as that of water.

 FORCE OF GRAVITY UPON THE MOON.
4, compared with the
6 which we found for the earth, shows that on the whole the moon is
much what we should expect to find, for weight, the force which tends to
 The weight
force with which the earth or moon attracts it, and this by the law of






The cubic yard of rock, which upon the earth weighs two tons, would, if
only one sixth as much influence in compressing the rocks below it as it
 Note that this rock when transported to the moon
earth, but it is not this of which we are speaking; by its weight in
 Making due
say that in general, so far as density goes, the moon is very like a

97.
--In another respect the lunar stuff is like that of which
the same amount.
surface shows, as we shall see in another section, the presence of
different degrees.
percentage of the incident sunlight is called _albedo_ (Latin,
suppose that its albedo is very great, like that of snow or those masses
 But this is only an effect
 The same moon by day
our common rocks--weather-beaten sandstone according to Sir John
rock or brick which would shine in the sunlight much as does the real

The effect produced by the differences of albedo upon the moon's face is
glowing coals, the face in the moon is anything which we choose to make
 Among the Chinese it is said to be a monkey pounding rice; in India,

98.
--We have already learned that the moon turns always the
to find that here, as in so many other cases, the thing we learn first
modified in some way.
understood at first sight or to be perfectly represented by a simple
 In Fig.
three years apart, the right-hand one a little after first quarter and
 They therefore
edge the same region is shown on both photographs, and features common
 g.
a right-angled triangle about one third of the way down from the top of
 If the moon
of any one of these markings from any part of the moon's edge must be
is not the case, and that in the left-hand picture the upper edge of the
whole moon had been rotated slightly about a horizontal line and must be
part of the picture.

that the moon librates not only in the direction above measured, north
are able to see a little farther around every part of the moon's edge
same face.
side of the moon an area of 6,000,000 square miles which is forever
although there is no reason to suppose it very different from that which
speculations to the contrary.
about equal in extent to this unknown region, while North America is a
central parts which are constantly visible, and the zone around the edge

An interesting consequence of the peculiar rotation of the moon is that
 Sun, stars, and planets
earth swings always overhead, shifting its position a few degrees one
succession of phases, new earth, first quarter, etc.
below the horizon, provided the observer is anywhere near the center of

[Illustration: FIG.
--Illustrating the moon's rotation.

 CAUSE OF LIBRATIONS.
remarkable a fact as that it should at all times turn very nearly the
 This latter fact can have but one meaning:
for this revolution is just equal to the time required to make a
 Place two coins upon a table with their heads
 54, and move the smaller one around
larger one.
coin will be successively directed toward every point of the compass,
made just one revolution about an axis perpendicular to the plane of its
 In no other way can it be made to face always away from the

We are now in a position to understand the moon's librations, for, if
turns about its axis, a new side will be turned toward the center, and
position.
that of Mercury (Fig.
to this there are present other minor influences, such as the fact that
orbit; in addition to this the observer upon the earth is daily carried
, so that it is
orbit keep pace with each other.
anchored in the same place, although wind and waves may cause it to

How the moon came to have this exact equality between its times of
we shall not now enter; but the equality having once been established,

The attraction of the earth for the moon has very slightly pulled the
points toward the earth, is a little longer than any other, and thus
lowest possible position--i.
, the position in which it points toward
 Just how long this handle is, remains unknown,
yards of elongation would suffice for the work it has to do.

 THE MOON AS A WORLD.
satellite of the earth, dependent upon the earth, and interesting
 But the moon is something more
although not wholly unlike it.
earth's surface is its division into land and water, and nothing of this
 It is true that the first generation of
dark patches shown in Fig.
oceans, seas, lakes, and ponds, and to the present day we keep those
moon's surface are as dry as any other.
a different kind of material from that composing the lighter parts of
have light-colored and dark-colored rocks, marble and slate, which seen
 Although
unaided eye, it is far otherwise in the telescope or the photograph,
seen, which are apparently depressions in the moon and are called
 These we find in great number all over the moon, but, as the
_terminator_--i.
, the dividing line between day and night, since the
details of the surface better than elsewhere.
 55

[Illustration: FIG.
--The moon at first and last quarter.
Observatory photographs.

common there than here, is illustrated in the chain of mountains visible
of Fig.
 This particular range of mountains, which is called the
although others, the Alps and Caucasus, exist.
lunar mountains stand alone, each by itself, instead of being grouped
 Note in the figure that some of the lunar
projecting up into the sunlight, and thus becoming visible, while the

A subordinate feature of the moon's surface is the system of _rays_
extending over hill and valley sometimes for hundreds of miles.
suggestion of these rays may be seen in Fig.
great crater Copernicus a little southwest of the end of the Apennines,
moon around the crater Tycho, which lies near the south pole of the
 Look for them with an opera glass.

which, under favorable conditions of illumination, appear like long
Western country.

 THE MAP OF THE MOON.
 55 furnishes a fairly good map of a
or no detail can be seen.
not be seen to advantage at any one time, and to remedy this we need to
the several parts of the moon as they appear at their best.
 56
representing the principal features of the lunar surface in a way they
 Perhaps its most striking feature is
the map and oval at the edges, with their long diameters parallel to the
 This is, of course, an effect of the curvature of the
thus see their formations much foreshortened in the direction of the

[Illustration: FIG.
--Relief map of the moon's surface.
NASMYTH and CARPENTER.

map respectively, and a mere inspection of the regions around them will
the northern.
lunar craters, and how in crowded regions they overlap one another.

learned to know in the photograph (Fig.
and the continuation of the Apennines, extending into the dark part of

[Illustration: FIG.
--Mare Imbrium.
 W.
]
102.
--We may measure distances here in the
scale of the map is very much distorted parallel to the moon's diameter,
parallel to the edge.
map for the diameter of the crater Copernicus, 2.
 To turn
the same map the diameter of the moon, 79.
the proportion--
    Diameter of Copernicus in miles : 2,163 :: 2.
7,
which when solved gives 57 miles.
trifle over 56 miles.
Apennines, is a large oval spot called the Mare Crisium (Latin, _ma-re_
 Measure its length.
Apennines is called Archimedes.
in the photograph (Fig.
 The true


 57 is from a photograph
of the sea is a sufficient indication that, in this case at least, the

[Illustration: FIG.
--Mare Crisium.
]
Fig.
beginning to encroach upon its eastern border, and it serves well to
area.

compare Fig.
and Fig.
Apennines.

[Illustration: FIG.
--Illustrating the rugged character of the moon's
--NASMYTH and CARPENTER.

 THE MOON'S ATMOSPHERE.
sharp and black as those of Fig.
and reflected in all directions by the dust and vapors of the
off is at least partially illumined by this reflected light.
of Fig.
that if the moon has any atmosphere whatever, its density must be
 In its
the technical word), and if the moon had an atmosphere such as is shown
 61, the light from the star _A_ must shine through this
must be refracted by the atmosphere so that the star would appear in a
 The earth's
a degree, but no one has been able to find in the case of the moon any

has no atmosphere, we shall be entirely safe in saying that if it has
earth's atmosphere.
is the fact that clouds never float over the surface of the moon.
features always stand out hard and clear, without any of that haze and
landscapes.

 60.
 NASMYTH and
]
104.
--Attention has already been called
 55 prolong the range of
 These are the beginnings of the Caucasus
to which they rise above the surrounding level of the moon: Fig.
represents a part of the lunar surface along the boundary line between
a level ray of sunlight which just touches the moon at _T_ and barely
determined.
the distance, _T M_, we shall have in the right-angled triangle _M T C_,
    R^{2} + s^{2} = (R + h)^{2},
and we need only to measure _s_--that is, the distance from the
determine _h_, since _R_ is already known, being half the diameter of
 Practically it is more convenient to use instead
algebra may show to be very nearly equivalent to it:
        _h_ (miles) = s^{2} / 2163,
44 s^{2}.


 55 the distance from the terminator to the first detached peak
7 millimeters = 52 miles, from which we
25 miles, or 6,600 feet.

 61.
]
[Illustration: FIG.
--Determining the height of a lunar mountain.

 On the
the moon there is no sea, and our 6,600 feet is simply the height of the
from which we measure its distance.
appearance of things, that the sunlight, instead of just touching the
extends some little distance down from its summit, and the 6,600 feet is
the sunlight reaches.
higher, and our photograph must be taken at the exact moment when this
to measure the altitude of the mountain's summit.
the most northern visible mountain of the Caucasus range.
the outlying spurs of the great mountain Calippus, whose principal peak,
 55 as the brightest part of the

The highest peak of the lunar Apennines, Huyghens, has an altitude of
of the moon, reach an altitude 50 per cent greater than this, and are
 This falls very little short of
than the earth, and these mountains are considerably higher than

The vagueness of outline of the terminator makes it difficult to measure
heights of lunar mountains can be obtained by measuring the length of
measured by means of the shadows which fall into them.

 CRATERS.
 63 shows a typical lunar crater, and conveys a good
 Compare the appearance of
accurate measurement of many such:
A.
usually by an elevated ring which rises above the general level of the
distance below that level.

 Craters are shallow, their diameters ranging from five times to more
 Archimedes, whose diameter we found to be
its surrounding wall, and is relatively a shallow crater.

 63.
--NASMYTH and
]
C.
however, rarely, if ever, reach up to the level of the surrounding wall.

 Whatever may have been the mode of their formation, the craters can
piling it up to make the wall, for in three cases out of four the volume
the wall.

 MOON AND EARTH.
likeness and the unlikeness of the moon and earth.
enough be likened to offspring of the same parent who have followed very
different circumstances.
circumstances is the atmosphere, which gives to the earth a wealth of
 Clouds, wind, rain, snow,
be found where it is not.
that great group of changes which we call weather, and the unruffled
and sunshine which the earth would present if seen from the moon.

without it the moon must be wrapped in silence more absolute than can be
 So, too, the absence of an
moon, for if so it would immediately evaporate and produce a gaseous
 With air and water absent
and we are compelled to regard it as an arid desert, utterly waste.

 TEMPERATURE OF THE MOON.
deserts, which is possessed in exaggerated degree by the moon, is the
 Owing to
radiation uninterruptedly for more than a fortnight, and that too
 Then for a like period it
interplanetary space without hindrance its accumulated store of heat.
is easy to see that the range of temperature between day and night must
shorter days and clouded skies render day and night more nearly alike,
for equalizing temperatures.
is hard to determine, and very different estimates are to be found in
 Perhaps the most reliable of these are furnished by the
conclude that "its rocky surface at midday, in latitudes where the sun
terrible of earth's deserts, where the burning sands blister the skin,
cloudless surface of our satellite.
the moon can have an endurable temperature by day, to say nothing of the
from such intense cold.

sinks to something like 200° below zero on the centigrade scale, or 320°
the earth, according to General Greely, is 90° Fahr.
recorded in Siberia in January, 1885.

rotation axis is nearly perpendicular to the plane of the earth's orbit
equator.
its physical condition appear to run their complete course.

 CHANGES IN THE MOON.
changes in the condition of the moon's surface as with us mark the
wilderness.
violent oscillations of temperature from day to night ought to have some
are there so common and so pronounced.
have searched carefully for changes of this kind--the filling up of some
kind have been reported from time to time, the evidence in their behalf
 At the present time it is an open
earth are in progress.
in the telescope, but it is not easy to tell whether so minute an object
changes are seen they may be apparent rather than real.
 64 contains
afternoon sun respectively, and shows a very pronounced difference

accept smaller ones as real.

 64.
afternoon.
]
It is this absence of change that is responsible for the rugged and
made, while upon the earth rain and frost are continually wearing down
unending process of smoothing off the roughnesses of its surface.
the moon this process is almost if not wholly wanting, and the moon

109.
--There is a widespread popular
upon terrestrial affairs: that it affects the weather for good or ill,
timber cut at the right time of the moon, etc.
means moonstruck--i.
, one upon whom the moon has shone while
 There is not the slightest scientific basis for any of these
magic, and popular delusion.
the earth is limited to the light which it sends and the effect of its
 We receive from the
trifling magnetic influence, but neither of these last effects comes
in saying that, save the moonlight and the tides, every supposed lunar
detected.


CHAPTER X
THE SUN

 DEPENDENCE OF THE EARTH UPON THE SUN.
introduction to the study of the sun than Byron's Ode to Darkness,

    That was not all a dream.
    The bright sun was extinguished,"
and proceeding to depict in vivid words the consequences of this
 The most matter-of-fact language of science agrees with the
all those varied forms of energy which make it a fit abode for living
 The winds blow and the rivers run; the crops grow, are gathered
 Factory, locomotive, beast,
from the sun; and the student will find it an instructive exercise to
directly or indirectly from the sun.
neither numerous nor important.

 THE SUN'S DISTANCE FROM THE EARTH.
presents problems of the highest consequence and apparently of very
a mechanical explanation of the sun considered as a machine; what it is,
 In the forefront of these problems stand those
, which
here be dealt with in a different manner, because the immensely greater
method as the triangle used for determining the moon's distance.
would be like determining the distance of a steeple a mile away by
short a base for the triangle.
better footing than in the case of the moon, for the mass of the earth
mass, and we have only to invert the fraction in order to find that the
333,000 times that of the earth alone.

for us the distance of the sun through the law of gravitation as
to be imperfect corollaries from the law of gravitation, requiring a
form of an equation Kepler's statement of the Third Law together with
 In these equations--
_T_ = Periodic time of any planet;
_a_ = One half the major axis of its orbit;
_m_ = Its mass;
_M_ = The mass of the sun;
_k_ = The gravitation constant corresponding to the particular set of

  (Kepler) a^{3}/T^{2} = h;

Kepler's idea was: For every planet which moves around the sun, _a^{3}_
concern himself with the significance of this quotient further than to
planet--e.
, the earth--be taken as the units of length and time, then
 Newton, on the other hand, attached a meaning to
multiplying the sum of the two masses, planet and sun, by a number which
whether it be between the sun and planet, or between moon and earth, or
only that we use always the same units with which to measure times,

Numerically, Newton's correction to Kepler's Third Law does not amount
 Jupiter, which shows the greatest
which it would require if Kepler's law were strictly true.
another respect the change is of the utmost importance, since it enables
planets, to other attracting bodies, such as the earth, moon, and stars.
Thus for the moon's motion around the earth we write--
    (240,000^{3})/(27.

mass as the unit of mass, the mean solar day as the unit of time, and


If we introduce this value of _k_ into the corresponding equation, which

25)^{2} = 1830 × 10^{10} (333,000 + 1),
where the large number in the parenthesis represents the number of times
 We shall find
earth, is very approximately 93,000,000 miles.

 ANOTHER METHOD OF DETERMINING THE SUN'S DISTANCE.
best appreciated by a reference to Fig.
 It appears here that the
August, and if in any August Mars happens to be in opposition, its
sun from the earth, and may be measured by methods not unlike those
 If now the orbits of Mars and the earth were
which we may represent by _D_, would be the difference of the radii of





known to a high degree of accuracy, these two equations are sufficient
 e.
distance of the sun from Mars as well as from the earth.
these equations is, of course, not strictly true, on account of the
enough.

sun's distance through observations of an asteroid rather than
astronomers by the discovery, in 1898, of an asteroid, or planet, Eros,
other heavenly body except the moon, and which will at future
than any hitherto available.
made at the present time (October, 1900).

astronomers, some of them extremely ingenious and interesting, but every
 g.
the earth in the first method given above and the measurement of _D_ in
uncertain to the extent of 200,000 miles or more, and astronomers,
an average of their results.
average value is 92,796,950 miles, and it seems certain that a line of
within the body of the sun, but whether on the nearer or the farther

114.
--It is quite customary among astronomers to
meaning by parallax its difference of direction as seen from the center
 e.
radius of the earth placed at right angles to the line of sight.
greater the sun's distance the smaller will this angle be, and it
being represented by a small number, 8".

The books abound with illustrations intended to help the reader
of these must suffice here.
would be counted a good bicycling record, but the rider who started at
from the year 1 A.
 down to the present moment would not yet have
quarters done.
of Charlemagne, and that of Mercury soon after the discovery of America.

 SIZE AND DENSITY OF THE SUN.
is easy to find from the angle subtended by its diameter (32 minutes of
 We recall in
miles, but little more than half the diameter of the sun, thus affording
monthly revolution about its orbit, as shown in Fig.

[Illustration: FIG.
--The sun's size.
]
In the same manner in which the density of the moon was found from its
the sun given above that its mean density is 1.

just about one quarter of the average density of the earth.

diminished weight of objects upon it, but this explanation can not hold
of gravity (weight) is there 28 times as great as upon the earth.
athlete who here weighs 175 pounds, if transported to the surface of the
bones break under his own weight if his muscles were strong enough to
 The tremendous pressure exerted by gravity at the
not pack the material together and make it dense, we are driven to one
altogether unlike that of the earth, not so readily compressed by
balances the effect of gravity and makes the solar stuff much lighter

116.
--As to the first of these
spectrum (Fig.
always indicates the presence of sodium and identifies at least one

the constituents of water, _E_ shows calcium to be present in the sun,
 In this way it has been shown that about one half of
on or near the sun's surface, but it must not be inferred that elements
 They may be there,
more difficult to obtain.
the study of the solar spectrum, says: "Were the whole earth heated to
the sun very closely.

















the earth, it seems that we must regard these bodies as more like than
of our alternatives: there must be some influence opposing the force of
we need not seek far to find it in--
117.
--That the sun is hot is too evident to require
makes them less dense.
and diminishes its density in some small degree, and we have only to
becomes 58 per cent larger than it now is, to find the earth's density
 Just how much the temperature
not know, neither do we know accurately the temperature of the sun, but
and that the corresponding temperature is very high.

well to draw a sharp distinction between the two terms heat and
 Heat
substance, whether warm or cold--a block of ice contains a considerable
and cold, and measures the extent to which heat is concentrated in the
 It is the amount of heat per molecule of the body.
warm water contains more heat than the flame of a match, but its
 Bearing in mind this distinction, we seek to
temperature, and this involves the same difficulty as does the question,
and another thing in the driving wheels, and still another at the
in different parts--one thing at the center and another at the surface.
Even those parts which we see are covered by a veil of gases which
seriously interfere both with the emission of energy from the sun and
surface from which that energy streams.

the wildest discordance has been found in estimates of the solar
values ranging from 1,400° C.
 Quite recently,
brought about a better agreement of results, and it now seems probable
between 5,000° and 10,000° C.

118.
--One ingenious method which has
stated above, that every object, whether warm or cold, contains heat and
 The radiation from a body
 is made up exclusively of energy
invisible to the eye, although a thermometer or even the human hand can
 A brick wall in the summer sunshine
 When
(wave lengths) of energy as before, but new and shorter waves are added
or 7,600 tenth meters, it also begins to shine with a dull-red light,
the temperature rises, and waves of still shorter length are thereby
 We say, in common speech, the body becomes first
the kind or color of the radiation which a body gives off is an index to
 The greater the proportion of energy of short wave
 In sunlight
5,600 tenth meters, but the greatest intensity of radiation of all kinds
in the spectrum at or near the wave length 5,000 tenth meters, and if we
degrees centigrade from the absolute zero is always equal to the
corresponding to maximum radiation--we shall find at once for the

Paschen's law has been shown to hold true, at least approximately, for
as it is not yet certain that it is strictly true and holds for all
result furnished by it.

 66.
 Photographed at the
]
[Illustration: FIG.
--The sun, August 14, 1894.
Goodsell Observatory.

 THE SUN'S SURFACE.
sun and moon in respect of the amount of detail to be seen upon them,
craters, and seas of the moon.
sun only a blank bright circle as smooth and unmarked as the surface of
little more.
number of black patches called _sun spots_, such as are shown in Figs.
66 to 69, and occasionally these are large enough to be seen through a
 When seen near the edge of
 69, by vague
little brighter than the surrounding parts of the sun.
photograph of the sun usually shows that the central parts of the disk
be, since the absorption lines in the sun's spectrum have already taught
which in some measure absorb the emitted light and render it feebler at
than at the center.
 70, where it is shown that the energy
longer path inside the vapors than does that coming from the center.

 68.
 Photographed at the
]
Examine the sun spots in the four photographs, Figs.
that the two spots which appear at the extreme left of the first
the sun's surface, are seen in a different part of the second picture,

[Illustration: PLATE II.

 THE SUN'S ROTATION.
the sun rotates about an axis at right angles to the direction of the
faint line ruled obliquely across the face of the sun nearly north and
 This rotation in the space of
the disk, and the student should note the progress of the spots in the
disappear around the farther edge of the sun.

 69.
 Photographed at the
]
Plot accurately in one of these figures the positions of the spots as
across the sun's face is a straight line.
should not be straight?
These four pictures may be made to illustrate many things about the sun.
Thus the sun's axis is not parallel to that of the earth, for the
face of the sun, and this line, of course, is parallel to the earth's
 The group of
least an equal time must be required to move around the opposite side of
something more than 20 days.
for this same group of spots reappeared again on the left-hand edge of

[Illustration: FIG.
--Absorption at the sun's edge.

 SUN SPOTS.
photographs.
since they changed their size and shape very appreciably in the few days
 Compare particularly the photographs of August
curvature of the sun's surface.
had disappeared absolutely from the sun's face, although when at its
of the individual spots were large enough to contain the earth if it had
 From Fig.
the group on August 14th.
 71 shows an enlarged view of these spots
well shown in the preceding pictures.
black part called the _nucleus_ or _umbra_ (Latin, shadow), which is
shadow), which is intermediate in brightness between the nucleus and
 It should not be inferred from the
 It shines, in
background furnished by the sun's surface is so much brighter that by

[Illustration: FIG.
--Sun spots, August 17, 1894.
Observatory.

 72.
--From LANGLEY, The
 By permission of the publishers.

called the _photosphere_ (Greek, light sphere), and, as Fig.
it assumes under a suitable magnifying power a mottled aspect quite

spaces between them, and the fine detail of these clouds, their
background of a sun spot, they produce its penumbra, are all brought out
 72.
represents North and South America drawn to the same scale as the sun

[Illustration: FIG.
--Spectroheliograph, showing distribution of
--HALE.

 74.
--TROUVELOT.

 FACULÆ.
 69 a few of the bright spots called
 At the telescope or in the ordinary photograph these can be seen
by the photosphere is so bright that they are lost in it.
possible, however, by an ingenious application of the spectroscope to
brightness of this background, much more than the brightness of the
sun's surface which shall show them wherever they occur, and such a

 The faculæ are the bright patches which stretch inconspicuously
comparatively empty lane between them.
equator, and it is upon either side of it between latitudes 5° and 40°
 It is significant of their connection
rarely found outside them.

 75.
--SCHAEBERLE.

 INVISIBLE PARTS OF THE SUN.
--Thus far we have been
all ordinary conditions.
an envelope, or rather several envelopes, of much greater extent than
 These envelopes are for the most part invisible save at
a total eclipse.

 76.
--CAMPBELL.

 74 is from a drawing, and Figs.
photographs showing this region, in which the most conspicuous object
the sun but is seen to be of differing shapes and differing extent at
differences is due to technical difficulties in photographing, and
 The
that it is impossible to assign to it precise dimensions, but at its
space more than twenty times as large as the visible part of the sun.
Despite its huge bulk, it is of most unsubstantial character, an airy
the sun from one side to the other, literally for millions of miles,
appreciable extent.
the bottom of the corona were greater than that of the best vacuum which
 It seems odd that a
and the exact character of that light and the nature of the corona are
agreed that, in part at least, its light is ordinary sunlight faintly
the corona.
the corona itself.
by one of the observers of the eclipse of May 28, 1900, is that _the
the instrument used for the observation.

 77.
--HALE.

 THE CHROMOSPHERE.
a thin separating layer called the _chromosphere_ (Greek, color sphere),
quite unlike anything else upon the sun save the _prominences_ which are
surface, as in a fountain a jet of water is thrown up from the basin and
 Not infrequently in such
twigs, small fish, etc.
along with them parts of the underlying layers of the sun, photosphere,
, which reveal their presence in the prominence by adding
chromosphere, which the prominence presents when they are absent.
of the eclipse photographs (Figs.
because the color effect is lacking in them, but a great curving
 75, and smaller ones at

[Illustration: FIG.
--A solar prominence.
]
125.
--Fig.
prominences rising to a height of 160,000 miles above the photosphere;
showed the same prominence grown in this brief interval to a stature of
 These pictures were not taken during an eclipse, but in
in connection with the faculæ to diminish the brightness of the
itself.
the sun's edge, but a part of the apparatus used to cut off the direct

Fig.
within an interval of 1 hour 47 minutes and showing changes in size and
was the very unusual change in the case of Fig.

[Illustration: FIG.
--Contrasted forms of solar
--ZOELLNER.

may compare Fig.
spectroscope by the German astronomer Zoellner.
are most marked in the prominence at the left, which is shaped like a
the other like a reed shaken in the wind.
frequently called an _eruptive_ one, a name suggested by its appearance
while the prominence at the right in this series of drawings, which
_quiescent_ prominence.
longer-lived than the eruptive ones.
(Fig.
out of which they spring.

 80.
--HALE.

alone that the necessary background can be obtained, but they must occur
it is probable that quiescent prominences are distributed over all parts
toward the regions of sun spots and faculæ as if all three were

126.
--Thus far we have considered the anatomy of
be a consideration of its physiology, the relation of the parts to each
but this step, unfortunately, must be a lame one.
astronomy to-day possesses no comprehensive and well-established theory
greatest pending problem of solar physics.
toward its solution, and among the steps of this progress that we shall
sun as a kind of heat engine.

energy, transformed into heat, is taken up by the water and delivered,
gives it out as mechanical work in the turning of shafts, the driving of
 Now, the function of the sun is exactly opposite to that
energy; but, like the engine, it must be fed from some source; it can
after day without fresh supplies of fuel under its boiler.
for some thousands of years the sun has been furnishing light and heat
alone, but it has been pouring forth these forms of energy in every
 Of all the
thousand million fall upon any planet of the solar system, and of this
its varied forms of life and action.
sought on every hand for an explanation of the means by which this
sensible diminution, and have come with almost one mind to the
mass furnish the only adequate explanation for it, although they may be
of meteoric dust and stones into the sun.

the pump grows warm during the operation, on account of the compression
 A part of the muscular force (energy)
and pump, and a similar process is forever going on in the sun, only in
attraction of gravitation, 28 times as great as upon the earth.
matter in the interior of the sun must be as a shuttlecock between the
tending to compress and the other to expand it, but with this important
heat energy is wasted away, while the gravitative force suffers no
causing the sun to shrink and become more dense.
shrinking and compression of its molecules into a smaller space which

diameter furnishes the energy required to keep up its radiation for
distance, the shrinkage might go on at this rate for many centuries

127.
--But Helmholtz's dynamical theory
includes one essential feature that is not sufficiently stated above.
order that the explanation may hold true, it is necessary that the sun
circumference of gases instead of solid or liquid parts.
warms the bicycle pump in a way that pumping water or oil will not.

supposing the solar material to be in the gaseous state, but the gas
different in some of its characteristics from the air or other gases
1,000 times as great as that of air, and its consistence and mechanical
with which we are familiar.
were dug into the crust of the earth to a depth of 15 or 20 miles the
density comparable with that of the solar gases.

 THE SUN'S CIRCULATION.
exist in the sun the outer portions, which can radiate their heat freely
difference of temperature must set up currents of hot matter drifting
matter settling down to take its place.
level at which the free radiation into outer space chills the hot matter
of liquid drops, just as on a cloudy day there is a level in our own
form the thin shell of clouds that hovers above the earth's surface,
 In the case of the sun
learned to call the photosphere.
chromosphere, composed of gases less easily liquefied, hydrogen is the
metallic vapors, perhaps indistinguishable from the top crust of the
liquid photosphere produces the greater part of the Fraunhofer lines in

From time to time the hot matter struggling up from below breaks through
vapors, is launched into the upper and cooler regions of the sun,
and is absorbed into it.
chiefly composed of fine particles ejected from the sun with velocities
sufficient to carry them off never to return.
must certainly be in a state of the most lively agitation, its particles
like fireworks, the particles which make up the corona of to-day being
 It seems
way by this up-and-down circulation of the sun's matter, and that any
but the problem is an exceedingly difficult one, and must include and
can be considered here.

 THE SUN-SPOT PERIOD.
particular spot is but short-lived, rarely lasting more than a month or
 They
seem to come and abound for a season and then almost to disappear, as if
active and quiet.
shown in Fig.
distance of the curve above this line for any year shows the relative
 This indicates
activity, while 1879 and 1889 were years in which few spots appeared.
The older records, covering a period of two centuries, show the same
curves (which may be found in Young's, The Sun) have been plotted,

[Illustration: FIG.
--The curve of sun-spot frequency.

one wave to the corresponding part of the next one, and on the average
considerable variation.
broken lines at the right of Fig.
sun-spot curve for the first decade of the twentieth century.
irregularity shown by the three preceding waves is such that we must not
to the prediction here made; but in a general way 1901 and 1911 will
but whether more or less numerous than at preceding epochs of greatest
we remain in our present ignorance of the causes which make the sun-spot

Determine from Fig.
sun-spot period.
hollow of the curve.
between top and bottom of the curve and determine the length of the
 g.

 82.
]
130.
--It has been already noted that sun spots are
and eruptive prominences abound in these zones more than elsewhere,
 We have now to note a
mechanism, although up to the present time it has not been successfully
 Just before a sun-spot minimum the few spots which appear
 As these spots
equator and about 25° or 30° distant from it, and as the period advances
the equator, thus approaching each other but leaving between them a
period, when the next minimum is at hand, it reaches its narrowest
 In Fig.
relations are shown for the period falling between 1879 and 1890, by
and one in the southern hemisphere of the sun, their lengths being
hemisphere during the year, and their positions on the sun's disk
 It is very
hemisphere was much more active than the northern one in the production
difference is not usually as great as in this particular decade.

 INFLUENCE OF THE SUN-SPOT PERIOD.
than the surrounding parts of the sun's surface, and, in view of the
in no way surprising if their presence or absence from the sun's face
lowering its temperature and quite possibly affecting it in other ways.
Ingenious men have suggested many such kinds of influence, which,
years.
rainfall, etc.
there may be a real connection between any or all of them and the
that there is only one case in which the evidence is strong enough to
 The magnetic condition of
certainly follow in a very marked manner the course of sun-spot
auroras (northern lights) stand in close relation to these magnetic

Upon the sun, however, the influence of the spot period is not limited
limits of the corona.
 81 the particular part of the
and note how the pictures which were taken near times of sun-spot minima
the pictures taken at a time of maximum activity of the sun spots show a

132.
--We have seen in a previous part of
upon its axis may be determined from photographs showing the progress of
when this is done systematically by means of many spots situated in
result.
rotation different from that of its neighbors on either side, so that

every other part, much as if the Gulf of Mexico should be south of the
decade should have shifted around to the opposite side of the earth from
 A meridian of longitude drawn down the Mississippi Valley remains
the earth, while Fig.
drawn through the equatorial parts of the sun's disk.
diagram it appears as a straight line running down the middle of the
 Twenty-five days later, when the same face of the sun comes
the equatorial parts will have moved so much faster and farther than
second diagram, and still more warped after another and another

[Illustration: FIG.
--Effect of the sun's peculiar rotation in
]
At least such is the case if the spots truly represent the way in which
 There is, however, a possibility that the spots
that the differences which we find in their rates of motion belong to
 Just what happens in the regions
halfway from the equator to the poles, and the spectroscope, which may
case, is not as yet altogether conclusive, nor are the faculæ which have

The simple theory that the solar phenomena are caused by an interchange
of the sun furnishes in its present shape little or no explanation of
peculiar character of the sun's rotation, etc.
unsolved in the mechanical theory of the sun one of the noblest problems
astronomers are assiduously working at the present time.
is kept upon sun spots and prominences, the corona is observed at every
suggested and tried for observing it without an eclipse in ordinary
 Attempts, more or less plausible, have been made and are now
of the refraction of light within the sun's outer envelope of gases, and
a considerable addition to our store of knowledge concerning the sun may





133.
--Circling about the sun, under the influence of his
moon, a dark body shining by reflected sunlight, and therefore
through the complete series--new, first quarter, full, last
 The way in which their orbits are
 16
planets by drawing in Fig.
9 and 12.
centimeters respectively, to represent the orbits of the planets Uranus
introducing a little inside the orbit of Jupiter about 500 ellipses of
planets or asteroids as they are often called.
regard these asteroids as composing by themselves a class of very small
other classes, a group of medium-sized ones--Mercury, Venus, Earth, and
the outer planets--Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune--each of which is
 Compare
 84 and 85 their relative sizes.
into Fig.

Some of these planets, like the earth, are attended by one or more
sunlight and which move about their respective planets in accordance

[Illustration: FIG.
--The inner planets and the moon.

 85.
]
134.
--It is a comparatively
among the stars, and to find from these observations how long each one
periodic time, _T_, which figures in Kepler's Third Law, and when these
that law to determine the mean distance of each planet from the sun.
Thus, Jupiter requires 4,333 days to move completely around its orbit;
we find--
    a^{3} / (4333^{2}) = (93,000,000^{3}) / (365.

483,730,000 miles, or 5.
 If we make a
from the sun show a remarkable agreement with an artificial series of
 We write down the numbers contained in the
obtained by doubling the preceding one, add 4 to each number and point
distance of the corresponding planet from the sun.

  Venus.
  Mars.
  Saturn.
  Neptune.
    0        3       6      12   24   48        96       192      384
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
4      0.
0    1.
8  5.
0      19.
8
4      0.
0    1.
8  5.
5      19.
1
The last line of figures shows the real distance of the planet as
being taken as the unit for this purpose.
agreement between Bode's law and the true distances is very striking,
8, with
 This led astronomers at the time Bode
to a suggestion made long before by Kepler, that there might be an
number of them agreed to search for such a planet, each in a part of the
 But they were anticipated by Piazzi,
the nineteenth century, moving at a distance from the sun represented by
77.

elapsed hundreds of them have been discovered, while at the present time
 While
and others are farther from it, their average distance is fairly
8.

an unexplained riddle, and many astronomers are inclined to call it no
"inherent capacity of figures to be juggled with"; but if so, it is
and of Uranus, which was also an undiscovered planet at the time the law

135.
--When we pass from general
planets, we find great differences in the extent of knowledge concerning
 Neptune and Uranus, at
illumined by the sun that any detailed study of them can go but little
density, the character of their orbits, etc.
that in the telescope they look like mere points of light, absolutely
 Mercury,
always stands so near the sun that its observation is difficult on this
 Something of the same kind is true for Venus, although in much
objects for telescopic study, and our knowledge of them, while far from

Figs.
inner and outer groups respectively, and furnish the numerical data
, which are of most
 Each planet, save
proportional to the size of the planet, and the inner shows the amount
remaining shell shall just float in water.
thickness of shell between the two groups.
less than that of water, must have something loaded upon it, instead of



 APPEARANCE.
with Jupiter, which is by far the largest of them, exceeding both in
 86 four
seen in a very small telescope--e.
, an opera glass--save that the
_3_, _4_, in order to preserve their identity in the successive

The chief interest of these pictures lies in the satellites, but,
resembles in shape the full moon, although in respect of brightness it
 From a
 16, show
its disk must be at all times nearly full.
kind of phases would Jupiter present?
137.
--Even upon the small scale of Fig.
characteristic feature of Jupiter's appearance in the telescope, the two
and in Fig.
abundance of detail which is here brought out by a large telescope.
Photography does not succeed as a means of reproducing this detail, and
 The
made, and also the longitude of the meridian of Jupiter passing down the

[Illustration: FIG.
--Jupiter and his satellites.

 87.
telescope of the Lick Observatory.
]
The dark bands are called technically the belts of Jupiter; and a
in which nearly the same face of the planet is turned toward us, will
even within the space of a few days.
markings as the round white spots in the upper parts of the disks, and
planet is in the act of turning round, and must therefore have an axis
 The belts are in fact
the pictures, we may say that there is always a strongly marked belt on
and that farther from the equator are other belts variable in number,
 Compare
sun-spot activity in the sun.
can not be here reproduced, is the rich color effect to be found upon
 The principal belts are a brick-red or salmon color, the intervening
browns, and greens.

and they must be turned upside down if we wish the points of the compass
 Bearing this in mind, note in the

which appeared first in 1878 and has persisted to the present day
reduced to a mere ghost of itself, almost invisible save for the

138.
--One further significant fact
the drawings; the planet is flattened at the poles, so that its polar
diameter.
three-hundredth part, and the marked difference between these two
rotation about its axis, since in both cases it is this rotation which

It is not easy to determine the precise dimensions of the planet, since
subtended by its diameter, but the most recent determinations of this
diameter 84,400 miles.
of the great red spot.

can be assigned to Jupiter, which, like the sun, seems to have different
 50m.
and 9h.
 in the dark belts and higher latitudes.
indication that the larger part of the visible surface rotates in 9h.
55.
, while a broad stream along the equator flows eastward some 270
from the earth, five or six minutes earlier than the parts which do not
 Judged by terrestrial standards, 270 miles per
scale, and, too, we have to compare this movement, not to a current
earth's atmosphere.
cloud formation, and contains nothing solid or permanent, if indeed
 The great red
fixed relative to the surrounding formations, drifted two thirds of the
now slowly retracing its path.

 PHYSICAL CONDITION.
condition of Jupiter, we have now to consider some independent lines of
although classed with the earth as a planet, is in its essential

_Appearance.
 87 look like clouds.
They gather and disappear, and the only element of permanence about them
 If we
very high, like that of snow or our own cumulus clouds, and it is of
bands.
darker belts is like that reflected from the lighter parts, save that a
thus producing the ruddy tint of the belts, as sunset colors are
farther into the planet's atmosphere before being thrown back by
 The dark bands are therefore
considerable distance and indicating an atmosphere of great depth.
great red spot, 28,000 miles long, and obviously thrusting back the
patch on the face of the planet, but indicates some considerable depth

_Density.
3
suggests that the larger part of the planet's bulk may be made of gases
we get into a difficulty from which there seems but one escape.
force of gravity at the visible surface of Jupiter may be found from its
6 times as great as at the surface of the
to compress the lower strata into something more dense than we find in
 Some idea of this compression may be obtained from Fig.
where the line marked _E_ shows approximately how the density of the air
the earth through a distance of 16 miles, the density at any level being
near it.
would increase if the force of gravity were as great here as it is in
 Starting from
not 16 miles, but 1,600 or 16,000, what must the density of the
be the very small mean density of the planet?
We are here in a dilemma between density on the one hand and the effects
assumption that the interior of Jupiter is tremendously hot, and that
to which it is subject, making a large planet with a low density,
a shell of clouds condensed from the gases by radiating their heat into

[Illustration: FIG.
--Increase of density in the atmospheres of
]
This is essentially the same physical condition that we found for the
Jupiter, that there seems to be a circulation of matter from the hot
the southern hemisphere than in the northern, and that has its periods
coincide with periods of maximum and minimum sun-spot development.
this, however, we can not be entirely sure, since it is only in recent
observations are required to show whether the agreement is something

_Temperature.
lower than that of the sun, since the surface which we see is not
Jupiter may be incandescent, white hot, and it is surmised with some
clouds from time to time, and helps to produce the striking brilliancy

140.
--The satellites bear much the same
the planet in accordance with the law of gravitation, and conforming to

 86 the position of satellite No.
and note how it oscillates back and forth from left to right of Jupiter,
 _4_
evidently made only a fraction of a revolution in the time covered by
 This quicker motion, of course, means that No.
nearer to Jupiter than No.
show the order of their distances from the planet.
which the satellites are grouped, always standing nearly in a straight
that this plane, which is also the plane of the planets' equator, is

These satellites enjoy the distinction of being the first objects ever
immediately after its invention, A.
 1610.
before this time they may have been seen with the naked eye, for in more
favorable circumstances by sharp-eyed persons, and very little
 Look for them with an opera or
 They bear the names Io, Europa, Ganymede, Callisto, which,
shall designate them by the Roman numerals I, II, III, IV.

 89.
]
For nearly three centuries (1610 to 1892) astronomers spoke of the four
the number by Professor Barnard, who, observing with the largest
1/600 part as bright as the other satellites, but, like them, revolving
 This is called the
 89 shows the orbits of these satellites around
themselves.
size of the moon's orbit.
satellites expressed in days, and furnishes in this respect a striking
 Satellite I is a little
influence of a greater attraction it makes the circuit of its orbit in
77 days, instead of taking 29.
 Determine
Jupiter than the earth.

 86, they are really bodies of
 90, where their dimensions are
is not included.
measuring its diameter, but, judging from the amount of light it
gross exaggeration of this satellite's size.

 90.
and moon.

in itself, and as such a fitting object of detailed study, but,
with the most powerful telescope, to see more upon their surfaces than
the satellites upon their axes.

in disturbing each other's motion about Jupiter.
resulting densities of the satellites are smaller than we should have
averaging only a little greater than the density of Jupiter itself.
the surface of the third satellite the force of gravity is but little
great as that of III, and there can be no question here of accounting
the sun and Jupiter.
solid bodies, like the earth and moon, but only shoals of rock and
the action of Jupiter in raising tides within them.
can hardly be regarded as an accepted article of astronomical belief,
the apparent shapes of the satellites change under the influence of the

141.
--It may be seen from Fig.
their motion around the planet Jupiter's satellites must from time to
the satellites will occasionally fall upon the planet, producing to an
earth presenting only the appearance of a round black spot moving slowly
 Occasionally also a satellite will pass
the planet as a background.
and observed by astronomers, but the eclipses are the only ones we need
 The importance of these eclipses was early recognized,
which would permit accurate predictions of them to be made.
they met with no great success, for while it was easy enough to foretell
assign the hour of the night, it was not possible to make the predicted
Danish astronomer of the seventeenth century, found where lay the
 His discovery was, that whenever the earth was on the side of
predicted time, and when the earth was on the far side of its orbit they
 He correctly inferred
exerted upon Jupiter and his satellites, but through the fact that the
appreciable time to cross the intervening space, and a longer time when

For half a century Roemer's views found little credence, but we know now
 18s.
early when the earth is nearest to Jupiter, and 8m.
 late when it is
 This is equivalent to saying that
 18s.
that at any moment we see the sun not as it then is, but as it was 8
 It has been found possible in recent years to measure
miles per second--and multiplying this number by the 498s.
 18s.
we obtain a new determination of the sun's distance from the earth.
product of the two numbers is 92,795,826, in very fair agreement with
method, like every other, has its weak side, and the result may be a

It is worthy of note in this connection that both methods of obtaining
Law, while the result obtained from Jupiter's satellites is entirely
therefore good evidence both for the truth of Kepler's laws and for the
 This mode of proof,
principles, and showing that they agree or disagree, is of wide



 THE RING OF SATURN.
to Jupiter, and although far inferior to him in these respects, it
 But the
body in the heavens is its ring, which was long a puzzle to the
called Saturn a planet with ears), but, was after nearly half a century
translate into--"It is surrounded by a ring, thin, flat, nowhere
"
[Illustration: FIG.
--Aspects of Saturn's rings.

 91, which shows some of the
its orbit.
last words of his description, for, if the plane of the ring coincided
turned edgewise toward the earth, as shown in the middle picture of the
 Fig.
center of Saturn's orbit, across whose circumference are ruled some
tilted up, no matter where the planet is in its orbit.
that an observer upon the earth will see the _N_ side of the ring when
the first and third pictures of Fig.
positions the edge of the ring will be presented to the earth.

 92.
Saturn's orbital motion.

telescope of the Washburn Observatory the writer at that time saw
 The ring is so thin
 The names of the
 92 in their proper
disappear, or be exceedingly narrow, whenever Saturn is in the
 It
Sagittarius, and its southern face when the planet is in Gemini.
will be its appearance in 1907 at the date marked in the figure?
143.
--It is apparent from Figs.
Saturn's ring is really made up of two or more rings lying one inside of
is as clean and sharp as if cut with a knife.
the ring fades off into an obscure border called the _dusky ring_ or
 This requires a pretty good telescope to show it, as may
centuries during which the planet was assiduously studied with
recently as 1850.

effect of perspective, and they are in fact nearly circular with the
 The extreme diameter of the ring is 172,000
the student should obtain the width of the rings, their distance from
 As to thickness,
turned toward the earth, that it is very thin in comparison with its
measurement of this can be made.

 93.
]
From theoretical reasons based upon the law of gravitation astronomers
liquid bodies.
attraction would tear into fragments steel rings made after their size
 Quite recently Professor Keeler has shown, by applying the
ring's rotation about Saturn, that the inner parts of the ring move, as
furnishing a direct proof that they are not solid, and leaving no doubt
planet in its own orbit, like an independent satellite, but standing so
completely as if it were solid.
is easy to see why they are so thin.
flattened at the poles, and this flattening, or rather the protuberant
exerts upon it a direct force tending to thrust it down into the plane
 The ring lies in the plane of

The division of the ring into two parts, an outer and an inner ring, is
of satellites, which by their attractions produce perturbations in the
and inner rings falls at the place where by the law of gravitation the
 The dividing line
which the fragments have been swept clean away by the perturbing action
 Less conspicuous divisions are seen from time to time
still appreciable.
explanation is sufficient.


outer ring, and therefore reflect less sunlight.
strewn are the particles in this ring that it is in great measure
one of the satellites which was distinctly although faintly seen while
eclipse when it entered the shadow cast by the bright ring.

 THE BALL OF SATURN.
smaller copy of Jupiter.
polar diameter of 69,000 miles, and a mass 95 times that of the earth,
only 0.
density of Jupiter.
greater (1.
density, leads, as in the case of Jupiter, to the conclusion that the
inclosed by a shell of clouds which cuts off their glow from our eyes.

axis, making a revolution in 10 hours 14 minutes, but up to the present
rotation times.

 THE SATELLITES.
a larger number than belongs to any other planet, but with one exception
large telescope.
in 1898 by means of the image which it impressed upon a photographic

Titan, the largest of them, is distant 771,000 miles from the planet and
Jupiter, the similarity in distance, size and mass being rather
with Jupiter makes the periodic time of Titan--15 days 23 hours--much
 Can you apply Kepler's Third Law to the motion
for a particle at the outer or inner edge of the ring to revolve once

Saturn is about ten times as great as the moon's distance from the
one part of its orbit than in another, three or four times as bright
 This probably indicates that,
planet, and further, that one side of the satellite reflects the
 e.

always turn toward the earth one face when west, and the other face when



 CHIEF CHARACTERISTICS.
interesting chiefly as modern additions to the known members of the
 The circumstances leading to the discovery of Neptune have
it was found by accident in the year 1781 by William Herschel, who for
 It was
known from prehistoric times.

]
Uranus has four satellites, all of them very faint, which present only
 Instead of moving in orbits which are
satellites of the inner planets, their orbit planes are tipped up nearly

even greater degree, for its motion around the planet takes place in the
much as if the orbit of the satellite had been tipped over through an
 Turn a watch face down and note how the hands go round in
turned through 180°.

upon their surfaces, but the presence of broad absorption bands in their
in constitution from the atmosphere of the earth.
and the force of gravity at their surfaces, they are not very unlike
leading to the supposition that they are for the most part gaseous
Saturn.

one who knows just where to look for it.
in a telescope.

 THE INNER PLANETS.
we have been considering stands the group of four inner planets, or five
in being all small, dense, and solid bodies, which by comparison with
as huddled together close to the sun.
Fig.
density, etc.
understanding of a planet's physical condition.

VENUS
[Illustration: FIG.
--The phases of Venus.
]
148.
--Omitting the earth, Venus is by far the most
exception of the sun and moon, the most brilliant object in the sky, and
just where to look for it.
variations on account of its changing distance from the earth, and the
from Fig.
 These drawings bring out well the phases of the planet,
 17 what are the relative
would present each of these phases.
dark part of Venus's earthward side is always proportional in area to
 In the first picture of
 94 about two thirds of the surface corresponding to the full
and sun is therefore two thirds of 180°--i.
, 120°.
 17 find a
earth, as there shown, the angle between them will be 120°.
similar construction for the fourth picture in Fig.
 Which of these
with the apparent size of Venus in the two pictures? What is the phase

are too conspicuous in Fig.
reproduction; these shadings are at the best hard to see in the
lacking.
determination of the planet's time of rotation about its axis, and
maintains that Venus, like the earth, turns upon its axis in some period
the moon, it turns always the same face toward the center of its orbit,
revolution about the sun.
seen on this planet is easily found.
atmosphere is at all times heavily cloud-laden, so that we seldom, if
 There is, however, no
 It is much
temperature we should expect to be considerably higher than that of the
 But the cloud layer in its
practically no knowledge of the real temperature conditions at the

It is the clouds of Venus which in great measure are responsible for its
sunlight, and give to its surface an albedo greater than that of any

Of course, the presence of such cloud formations indicates that Venus is
this in the shape of its disk when the planet is very nearly between the
 The illuminated part, from tip to tip of the horns, then
that a certain amount of light must have been refracted through its
prolonged.
that of the earth, although, possibly, more dense.

MERCURY
149.
--Mercury, on account of its nearness to the
spent most of his life in Poland, is said, despite all his efforts, to
 In our more southern
each elongation--i.
, when at its greatest angular distance from the
 16 the time at which the next
first magnitude, low down in the sky just after sunset or before

until it disappears in the sun's rays, while in the evening sky its
 It should
emerges from the sun's rays.

moon, which it does not greatly surpass in size and which it strongly
 Careful comparisons of the amount of light
that its albedo agrees very closely with that of the moon, but also that
the same way as the amount of moonlight changes.
that its surface is like that of the moon, a rough and solid one, with
little or no atmosphere.
with the balance of probability favoring the view that it rotates upon
toward the sun.

in a perpetual day, where the direct heating power of the sun's rays,
and which six weeks later, when the planet is at its farthest from the
 On the opposite side of
mitigated by some slight access of warmth from the day side, and perhaps
side of the planet.
deviation of the planet's axis from being perpendicular to the plane of
eccentricity of the orbit, either of which would complicate without



 APPEARANCE.
in recent years received more attention than any other planet, and the
that it is inhabited by a race of beings superior in intelligence to
planet; that we should endeavor to communicate with them, if indeed they
--all of which is certainly
evidence, a part of which we shall have to consider.

planet, which usually shines about as brightly as a star of the first
surpassing every other planet save Venus and presenting at these times
 The
planet approaches unusually near to the earth, and we have already seen
 17 that this can only happen in the months
 The last favorable epoch of this kind was in
 From Fig.
come.

 95.
--SCHAEBERLE.

 95 presents nine drawings of the planet made at one of the epochs
faint markings which, though inconspicuous, are fixed and permanent
 The dark triangular projection in the lower
A.
 In Fig.
Fig.

[Illustration: FIG.
--Four views of Mars differing 90° in
--BARNARD.

 ROTATION.
first two sketches of Fig.
and from a more extensive study it is found to be very like the earth in
 37m.
perpendicular to the plane of its orbit about a degree and a half more
 Since it is this inclination of the axis which
changes, winter and summer, as well as day and night, upon Mars, only
year is longer than ours--i.
, nearly two to one.
northern hemisphere of Mars whenever the sun, as seen from Mars, stands
the planet's axis points.
Cygnus, and Alpha Cygni is the bright star nearest the north pole of
 As Pisces is the zodiacal constellation nearest to Cygnus, it must
or, turning the proposition about, it must be summer in the _southern_
direction of Pisces.

 THE POLAR CAPS.
shown in Fig.
its south pole made in 1894, on dates between May 21st and December
 Show from Fig.
region here shown.
5th.
the pole, which shrinks in size from the beginning to near the end of
 The spot came back again a
waxes in the winter and wanes during the summer of Mars in endless

[Illustration: FIG.
--The south polar cap of Mars in 1894.
]
Sir W.
them with the snow fields which every winter spread out from the region
with us they do not entirely disappear.
caps of Mars has been generally accepted among astronomers, and from it
between summer and winter oscillates above and below the freezing point
 But this
 The temperature of the
heating effect of the latter is reduced to less than half what it is at
earth, there must be some peculiar means for storing the solar heat and
 Possibly there is some
are very confident that it does not exist, and assert that the
the temperature upon Mars must be at least 100°, and perhaps 200° or

153.
--In this connection one feature of Mars is
 The markings upon its surface are always visible when
such amount of cloud as does our own, but on the whole is decidedly
 We have seen
the earth's atmosphere renders in storing the sun's heat and checking
and with this in mind we must regard the smaller density and cloudless
there of a temperature like that of the earth.
cloudlessness must mean one of two things: either the temperature is so
surface of Mars is so dry that there is little water or other liquid to
 The latter alternative is adopted by those astronomers
chief reservoir of the planet's water supply, and who find in Fig.
evidence that as the snow melts and the water flows away over the flat,
markings on the disk, and gradually dies out with the advancing season.
Note that in the first of these pictures the season upon Mars
beginning of August, a period during which in much of our western
scorching sun.
low-lying parts of the planet's surface, in which at all times there is

[Illustration: FIG.
--The same face of Mars at three different
--LOWELL.

 THE CANALS.
 98 the lower part of the disk of Mars shows
III there is given a map of Mars showing many of these canals running in
pattern almost as geometrical as that of a spider's web.
be taken for a picture of the planet's appearance in a telescope.
ever saw Mars look like this, but the map is useful as a plain
 Some of the regions of this map are
darker parts of the planet--and of the moon--as bodies of water, but
 The curved surface of a
but is always more or less distorted by the various methods of
 Compare the map of Mars in Plate III
 99, in which the projection represents very well the
around the poles.

one of these dark parts of the planet's surface; they show no loose ends
 Another even more remarkable
planet's surface, they at times appear "doubled"--i.
, in place of one
place again to a single canal.

canals and the varied appearances which they present.
wild speculations about Mars, to which reference is made above, is to be
earnest, that the canals are artificial water courses constructed upon a
to the presence in Mars of an advanced civilization.
Italian astronomer, Schiaparelli, who has studied these formations
lined on either side by vegetation, which flourishes as far back from
explanation if the fundamental difficulty about temperature can be

[Illustration: FIG.
--A chart of Mars, 1898-'99.
]
[Illustration: PLATE III.

 SATELLITES.
Hall, of Washington, discovered two tiny satellites revolving about Mars
anomaly of completing the circuit of its orbit in less time than the
 This satellite, in fact,
its axis, and it therefore rises in the west and sets in the east, as
than 6 hours.
day to make the circuit of its orbit, but the difference is so small
Mars for more than 60 hours at a time, and during this period runs twice
 In
favorable circumstances, and are far too small to permit of any direct
 The amount of light which they reflect has
as is Polaris to two full moons, and, judging from this comparison,
albedo is far less than that of Mars, which does not seem probable.

THE ASTEROIDS
156.
--These may be dismissed with few words.
about 500 of them known, all discovered since the beginning of the
 No one
are commonly represented by a number inclosed in a circle, showing the
 g.
[circle 433] = Eros, etc.
chips, world fragments, adrift in space, and naturally it was the larger
 The size of the first
the moon, according to Professor Barnard, is shown in Fig.
 The
perhaps not more than a score of miles in diameter.

Eros, on account of its close approach to the earth; Polyhymnia, whose
of Jupiter, etc.
now receives scant attention, although half a century ago, when only a
discovery of a new one was an event of some consequence.

an ill-fated planet which once filled the gap between the orbits of Mars

after the explosion moved in an elliptical orbit, as all the asteroids
the explosion, and all the asteroid orbits must therefore intersect at
 But there is no such common point of intersection.

 100.
asteroids.
]
157.
--There is a belief firmly grounded in the
astronomers, that the planets are inhabited by living and intelligent
briefly how far the facts and principles here developed are consistent

At the outset we must observe that the word life is an elastic term,
which we know here upon the earth.
crude knowledge of life, which lies at the root of the matter.
it exists in another planet, must be in its essential character like
common to all forms of terrestrial life.
say that life in Mars may be utterly unlike life in the earth; if it is
 Now, every
chemical compound, called protoplasm, which can exist and perpetuate
between 0° and 100° centigrade, although these limits can be
 Moreover, this
and we may therefore establish as the necessary conditions for the
temperature must not be permanently above 100° or below 0°, C.
water must be present in that place in some form.

the sun on account of its high temperature.
active and intelligent beings, salamanders, might exist there, but they
 In Jupiter and Saturn the same
Neptune, so that it seems highly improbable that any of these planets

Of the inner planets, Mercury and the moon seem destitute of any
water necessary for life, and the same is almost certainly true of all
 There remain Venus, Mars, and the satellites of the outer
too little known.
vapor of water, and it is well within the range of possibility that
temperature should fall within the prescribed limits.
be straining our actual knowledge to affirm that such is the case, or to
planet.

noted in § 152.
sufficiently high for the polar caps to be real snow, thawing and
of life would seem to be fulfilled here and life if once introduced upon
 But of positive proof that such is

On the whole, our survey lends little encouragement to the belief in
in the solar system, not one is found in which the necessary conditions
reasonable probability that these conditions may be satisfied.


CHAPTER XII
COMETS AND METEORS

 VISITORS IN THE SOLAR SYSTEM.
planets, stars--which we have thus far had to consider, are permanent
appearance differs appreciably from what it was 1,000 years or 10,000
 But there is another class of objects--comets, meteors--which
seen no more.
ancient and mediæval times for the most part refused to regard them as
Jack-o'-lanterns, and fireflies, as exhalations from the swamps or the
mankind, but having no especial significance for the astronomer.

 D.

      When it on high doth horrid range:
      War, Earthquakes, Floods, and Direful Change,"
which, according to White (History of the Doctrine of Comets), were to

It was by slow degrees, and only after direct measurements of parallax
of old opinion was turned and comets were transferred from the sublunary
been recognized as coming to us from outside the earth.
shooting star as it is often called, is one of the commonest of
moonless night without seeing several of those quick flashes of light
across a portion of the sky and then vanished.
appearance that probably is responsible for the name shooting star.

 101.
--BOND.

 COMETS.
lasting usually for several weeks, and may be visible night after night
 During the last
and 1898 is distinguished by the discovery of ten of these bodies, the
 On the average, we may expect a
part they are small affairs, visible only in the telescope, and a fine
 101), or the Great Comet of
sun, is a rare spectacle, and as striking and impressive as it is rare.

 102.
]
Note in Fig.
more famous comets, which are here represented upon a very small scale.

 103 is from a photograph of one of the faint comets of the year
stars which are scattered over the background of the picture.
apparently detached portion of this comet is shown at the extreme left
 The
of a bright meteor that chanced to pass within the range of the camera

A more striking representation of a moderately bright telescopic comet
 104 and 105, which present two different views of
 A
 105 is the star images, which are here drawn
 During the exposure
 20m.
plate, the comet was continually changing its position among the stars
from time to time, so as to follow the comet and make its image always
 Hence the plate was continually shifted relative
which the plate was moved--i.
, the direction in which the comet was
 The same effect is shown in the other
shorter exposure times.

apparently more dense than the other, and it is customary to call this
streams away from it is called the comet's _tail_.

 103.
 BARNARD.

 THE PARTS OF A COMET.
though all the large ones do, and in Fig.
cometary matter at the left of the picture represents very well the
of a fuzzy or hairy appearance.
hairy star.
comets, whose exact boundaries are hard to define, instead of being
 Often,
appearing part, like the round white ball at the center of Fig.
which is called the nucleus of the comet, and appears to be in some sort
 As shown in Figs.
107, the nucleus is sometimes surrounded by what are called envelopes,
it, and odd, spurlike projections, called jets, are sometimes found in
 These figures also
streak running down the axis of the tail, showing that the tail is

[Illustration: FIG.
--Swift's comet, April 17, 1892.
]
The amount of detail shown in Figs.
exceptional, and the ordinary comet is much more like Fig.

fragment in Fig.
grows through successive stages to its maximum estate, developing a
, only to lose them again as it shrinks

[Illustration: FIG.
--Swift's comet, April 24, 1892.
]
161.
--It will be remembered that Newton found, as
under the influence of the sun's attraction might have as its orbit any
the 400 and more comet orbits which have been determined every one of
among them which, if drawn upon paper, could be distinguished by the
narrow, not one of them being so nearly round as is the most eccentric
as being the normal type of comet orbit, and to regard a comet whose
some special explanation.

them, explains at once the temporary character and speedy disappearance
 They are visitors to the solar system and visible for
closed curve, and the comet, having passed once along that portion of it
takes it farther and farther away, beyond the limit of visibility.
development of the comet during the time it is visible, the growth and
, depend upon its changing distance
presented when it is nearest to the sun.

 106.
1874.
]
Fig.
which it was seen, from September 3, 1882, to May 26, 1883.
dates--IX, 3, and V, 26--are marked in the figure opposite the parts of
 Similarly, the
October, November, etc.
etc.
equinox, and _S_ Ω is the line along which the plane of the
 e.
the line of nodes of the comet orbit.
from the south side of the ecliptic, all of its orbit, save the little
the plane of the earth's orbit, and the part which would be hidden if

[Illustration: FIG.
--Head of Donati's comet, September 30, October
--BOND.

 ELEMENTS OF A COMET'S ORBIT.
effect that through any three points not in the same straight line one
 Corresponding to this there is a
comet one conic section, and only one, can be passed along which the
 This conic
astronomers always hasten to observe its position in the sky on
ascensions and declinations) necessary for determining the particular
 The circle, to which reference was made above,
position of its center.
numbers, called the _elements_ of its orbit, are required to fix
 Two of these relate to the
with the plane of the ecliptic; a third fixes the direction of the axis
interest to us, are the date at which the comet makes its nearest
at that date (_perihelion distance_).
near the center of Fig.
latter, which is too small to be accurately measured here, may be found
 109 to be 0.
earth's distance from the sun, 0.

[Illustration: FIG.
--Orbits of the earth and the Great Comet of
]
Fig.
the sun and gives the successive positions of the comet, at intervals of
hours--17.
4--the comet swung around the sun through an angle of
 When at its perihelion it was moving with a velocity of
extraordinarily close approach to the sun.
orbit is only 19 miles per second, and the velocity of any comet at any
by dividing this number by the square root of half the comet's
 g.
004.

 109.
around the sun.

between 1/3 and 4/3 of the earth's distance from the sun, but
approach to the sun lies far outside the earth's orbit, in this case
large one in order to be seen at all from the earth.
some reason for believing that the number of comets which move around
Saturn, is much larger than the number of those which come close enough
 In any case we are reminded of Kepler's
which seems to be very little exaggerated when we consider that,
probably not more than 2 or 3 per cent are ever discovered.

 110.
]
163.
--The comet whose orbit is shown in Figs.
and 109 is the finest and largest that has appeared in recent years.
tail, which at its maximum extent would have more than bridged the space
in Fig.
the Great Comet of 1843, shown in Fig.
 As we shall see later,

The head of the comet of 1882 was not especially large--about twice the
estimate made by Dr.
large as the moon.
 107 was too large
Comet of 1811 had a head considerably larger than the sun itself.
these colossal sizes down to the smallest shred just visible in the
comet the less the chance of its being discovered, and a comet as small
close to us.

 THE MASS OF A COMET.
comet has ever been measured, yet nothing about them is more sure than
planets, and which in its turn attracts both sun and planets and
 These perturbations are,
perturbations in the comet's motion are sometimes enormous, and since
planet, we are forced to say that, by comparison with even such small
insignificant, certainly not as great as a ten-thousandth part of the
 In the case of the Great Comet of 1882, if we leave
mass condensed into its head, we find by a little computation that the
less than 1/1500 of the density of air.
this would be called a pretty good vacuum.
on September 17, 1882, goes to confirm the very small density of this
 It is shown in Fig.
the line joining earth and sun, and therefore passed in transit over the
 Two observers at the Cape of Good Hope saw the comet
nucleus actually reached the edge of the sun and disappeared, behind it
be seen against the sun, although it was carefully looked for.
figure shows that the comet passed between the earth and sun, and its
fraction of the sun's rays.
the head of a comet, shining apparently with undimmed luster, although
true positions.

 METEORS.
well to turn aside and consider their humbler relatives, the shooting
 On some clear evening, when the moon is absent from the sky,
time.
they disappear, their brightness, and whether they all move with equal
 Out of such simple observations with the unaided eye there
parts of which we shall briefly summarize here.

the earth's surface, although occasionally a very big and bright one may
 Such a one in
Pennsylvania, and was seen from eleven different States.
ordinary shooting star is much less conspicuous, and, as we know from
appearance at a height of some 75 miles above the earth's surface,
disappears at a height of about 50 miles or more, although occasionally
sufficient to bury itself in the ground, from which it may be dug up,
 The
stone or mineral; iron is quite commonly found in them, as are a
peculiar ways.
been discovered in a meteor.

 NATURE OF METEORS.
shows that they must come from outside the earth, for even half their
explosive agent, would send them completely away from the earth never to
 We must therefore look upon them as so many projectiles,
in their motion by the earth's atmosphere, which serves as a cushion to
the highest degree dangerous to both property and life.
meteor is checked by the resistance which the atmosphere offers to its
heat, which in less than a second raises the meteor and the surrounding
usually destroys its identity, leaving only an impalpable dust, which
ground.
the square of the meteor's velocity, and even at such a moderate speed
stood still in a bath of red-hot air.
meteors through the air is often 30 or 40 times as great as this, and
than 1,000 times that of red heat.
brought to lively incandescence and consumed even in a fraction of a

167.
--A single observer may expect to see in the
although, of course, in this respect much irregularity may occur.
in the night they become more frequent, and after 2 A.
 there are
 But no one
behind, and experience shows that by increasing the number of observers
meteors counted may be increased about five-fold.
at any one place can keep an effective watch upon only those meteors
their station, say 50 or 100 miles, and to watch every part of that
something more than 10,000, scattered systematically over the whole face
 If we piece together the several numbers above considered,
by a single observer at all hours of the night, we shall find for
14 × 5 × 10,000 × 24 = 16,800,000.
this particular number, we may fairly say that the meteors picked up by
at all seasons of the year, we shall have to admit that the region
dust cloud, each individual particle of dust being a prospective meteor.

apart; a cloud of silver dimes each about 250 miles from its nearest
distance from each other, but, of course, great variations are to be
 There
visible to the naked eye, and such are occasionally seen darting by

168.
sunlight from the myriads of these tiny meteors which occupy the space
 It is a faint and diffuse stream of light,
morning stretching up from the sunrise or sunset point of the horizon
around the entire circumference of the sky.
of the year, although it shows to the best advantage in spring evenings
 Look for it.

 GREAT METEORS.
appearance, far more conspicuous and imposing than the ordinary shooting
 Such a one exploded over the city of Madrid, Spain, on the morning
was followed ninety seconds later by a succession of terrific noises
" Fig.
meteor which was seen in California in the early evening of July 27,
more than half an hour.

three or more in company, making their appearance simultaneously as did
the trio following one another like a train of cars, and Arago cites an
forty brilliant meteors crossed the sky, all moving in the same
colors of the rainbow.

not thousands of pounds, and stories are current, although not very well
found partially buried in the ground.
actually seen to fall from the sky, the largest single fragment
original meteor, which must have been much more massive before it was

[Illustration: FIG.
--The California meteor of July 27, 1894.

 THE VELOCITY OF METEORS.
to the law of gravitation, and before it encounters the earth must be
species of orbit--ellipse, parabola, hyperbola--depending upon the
 Now, the direction in which a
observations of its apparent path across the sky made by two or more
meteors go too fast for any ordinary process of timing.
photographing one of them two or three times on the same plate, with an
 Elkin has
20 to 25 miles per second, and must have been considerably greater than
 This is a
second, as might have been anticipated, since the mere fact that meteors
must travel considerably faster than the earth, for, counting in the
always on the rear side of the earth, and meteors in order to strike
 We have here, in
hours; at this time the observer is on the front side of the earth which
the swifter ones which follow it.

it probable that the average meteor moves, relative to the sun, with a
average velocity of comets when they are at the earth's distance from
 Astronomers, therefore, consider meteors as well as comets to
orbits.

 METEOR SHOWERS--THE RADIANT.
distinct tendency for individuals, to the number of hundreds or even
the same way in orbits almost exactly alike.
made manifest not only by the fact that from time to time there are
of their behavior at such times.
particular part of the heavens, as if here were a hole in the sky
every direction, even those which do not visibly start from this place
through it.

paths toward an observer at _D_.
they encounter the upper strata of its atmosphere, they here become
_6_, which, as seen by the observer, are projected back against the sky
_d_, all seem to radiate from the point _a_--i.
, from the point in
the meteors.

 112.
shower.
]
Such a display is called a meteor shower, and the point _a_ is called
 Note how those meteors which appear near the radiant all
ones.
will the radiant share in their motion or will it be left behind? Would
radiant from one side to the other? Is such a crossing of the radiant
 113 shows how the meteor paths
 Select from

[Illustration: FIG.
--The radiant of a meteoric shower, showing
shower.
]
Many hundreds of these radiants have been observed in the sky, each of
relation of one of these orbits to that of the earth is shown in Fig.
114.
orbit of Uranus, but so eccentric that a part of it comes inside the
nearest the sun.
orbit show the position of the earth at the beginning of the tenth
 The meteors flow along their orbit in a long
and the earth, coming in the opposite direction, plunges into this
of the two orbits.
the direction of motion of another meteor shower which encounters the

[Illustration: FIG.
--The orbits of the earth and the November
]
Can you determine from the figure answers to the following questions? On
radiant points of the showers lie above or below the plane of the
earth? Can they be seen in the evening hours?
From many of the radiants year after year, upon the same day or week in
must be a continuous procession of meteors moving along this orbit, so
intersection of its orbit with theirs.
shower which appears each year in the first half of August, and whose
constellation Perseus, and a similar explanation holds for all the star

172.
--There is, however, a kind of star shower, of which
shower, although repeated from year to year, is much more striking in
 Thus, to quote from the historian: "In 1833
America from the Gulf of Mexico to Halifax.
numerous at about 5 A.
 on November 13th, and the rising sun could not
and then in full daylight.
more than twenty could be seen at a time shooting in every direction.
Not a cloud obscured the broad expanse, and millions of meteors sped
 Their coruscations were
the early snows of December.
reached the ground.
"The stars continued to fall until none were left.
how the heavens will appear this evening, for I believe we shall see no
"
An eyewitness in the Southern States thus describes the effect of this
upon the ground, some speechless and some with the bitterest cries, but
 The
meteors fell toward the earth--east, west, north, and south it was the
" In the preceding year a similar but feebler shower from the same
records its repetitions may be traced back at intervals of 33 or 34
 S.
"an immense number of falling stars were seen to spread themselves over
"
Such a star shower differs from the one repeated every year chiefly in
procession, are mainly clustered in a single flock which may be long
its orbit, but which is far from extending entirely around it, so that
flock is at or near the intersection of its orbit with that of the
 The fact that the Leonid shower is repeated at intervals of 33 or
the "periodic time" in its orbit, which latter must of course be an
 It is this orbit which is
 114, and the student should note in this figure that if
earth's orbit were either nearer to or farther from the sun than is the
without a collision.
perturbations, particularly by the large planets Jupiter, Saturn, and
that the changes thus produced will sometimes thrust the swarm inside or
at times when it is expected.
the orbits in November, 1899 and 1900, and, although a few were then
doubtless caused by the outer planets, which switched the meteors aside
 Whether they
present time uncertain.

 CAPTURE OF THE LEONIDS.
perturbations is to be found in Fig.
the Leonid orbit to those of the principal planets, and illustrates a
out by mathematical analysis, and is probably a pretty good account of
 Early in the second century of the Christian
moving along a parabolic orbit which would have carried it just inside
 But
 As it approached the orbit of Uranus, in
 D.
perturbed the motion of the meteors to such an extent that the character
figure, and in this new orbit they have moved from that time to this,
 The
were captured and annexed to the solar system, but ever since that time
and have gradually turned it around into its present position as shown
in the thousand years that have elapsed since 902 A.
 that makes the
then.

 115.
Uranus.

 BREAKING UP A METEOR SWARM.
meteors were at the time of their annexation to the solar system is
exerting upon them a tidal influence tending to break up the swarm and
distributed, and, given sufficient time, it will accomplish this, but up
 A certain number of the
an extra circuit of the orbit and overtaken the rear of the procession,
orbit and furnishing in every November a Leonid shower; but by far the
a stream or ribbon, which, though very thin, is so long that it takes
 It is only
1901, that brilliant Leonid showers can be expected.

 RELATION OF COMETS AND METEORS.
meteors and comets move in similar orbits, and we have now to push the
move in identically the same orbit, or at least in orbits so like that
 Thus a
the same orbit with the Leonid meteors, passing its perihelion about ten
 If it were set back in its

actually immersed in the stream of meteor particles, and several other

Perhaps the most remarkable case of this character is that of a shower
Andromeda, and which from its association with the comet called Biela
Bielid shower.
small elliptical orbit, had been observed at various times from 1772
but about the beginning of the latter year, with very little warning, it
astronomers moving off, side by side, something more than half as far
 It disappeared, made the circuit of its
times as far apart as before, and after a short stay near the earth once
fragments should have returned to perihelion at least half a dozen times
 In one respect the orbit of the comet was remarkable: it
each year, so that if the comet were at that particular part of its
be inevitable.
ever occurred, but the Bielid meteors which are strung along its orbit
different years, and are watched with much interest by the astronomers
comet.

 PERIODIC COMETS.
astronomers call periodic comets--i.
, those which move in small
return frequently and regularly to perihelion.
accompany the other meteor swarms--Leonids, Perseids, etc.
to this class as do some 30 or 40 others which have periodic times less
 As has been already indicated, these deviations from the
substance of that explanation is contained in the account of the Leonid
 Any comet may be thus captured by
 It is only necessary
of the comet's velocity, for we have already learned that it is this
than the velocity appropriate to a parabola must produce an
 e.
after time in endless succession.
 115 that when the
had its velocity diminished and its orbit changed into an ellipse
 It might have passed behind Uranus, it would have passed behind
opposite.
hyperbola, and it would have left the solar system more rapidly than it
 Of
its own witness to what has happened, and bears imprinted upon its orbit
 Thus in Fig.
the changed orbit of the meteors has its _aphelion_ (part remotest from
the point in which it cuts through the plane of the ecliptic from north
 It is these two
planet instrumental in capturing the meteor swarm, and the date of the
an epoch at which planet and comet were simultaneously near this node.

capturer of comets, and Fig.
family of comets as they are sometimes called.
marked with the names commonly given to the comets.
the name of their discoverer, but often a different system is
 g.
through perihelion in the year 1886.
Uranus, Neptune--have also their families of captured comets, and
opinion about captured comets, the earth has caught no less than nine of

[Illustration: FIG.
--Jupiter's family of comets.

 COMET GROUPS.
group as it is called, which deserves some notice, and which is best
 No less than
orbit with this one, the group consisting of comets 1668, I; 1843, I;
 The orbit itself is not quite a parabola,
periodic time can not be very accurately determined from the available
requires not less than 500 years for the comet to complete a revolution
 It was for a time supposed that some one of the recent comets of
ahead of time by unknown perturbations.
this, but it is quite out of the question to suppose that the last four
comets moving in practically the same orbit.
a common origin for the comets, but leaves us to conjecture how they

The observed orbits of these five comets present some slight
the average of the observed paths it is a simple matter to fix their
 They have all receded from the
at the beginning of the year 1900, standing nearly motionless inside of
of the earth's orbit.
that part of their orbit near the sun (see § 162) is being compensated
1668 and 1882, whose passages through the solar system were separated by
aphelion of their orbits, separated by a distance only 50 per cent
substantially in this position for some two or three centuries to come.

strikingly illustrated by an equation of celestial mechanics which for
:
    r^3 / T^2 = 178,
where _T_ is the time, in years, required for the comet to move from its
is represented, in radii of the earth's orbit, by _r_.
1668 had moved in a parabola instead of the ellipse supposed above, how
the sun?
178.
--The orbits of these comets

they were exactly parabolic, and this carried with it the conclusion
 It may be so,
parabolic orbits of both comets and meteors are tipped at all possible
orbits of the planets; and by the further fact that, unlike the planets,
direction in which the sun rotates upon his axis.
utmost confusion among them in this respect, some going one way and some
 The law of the solar system (gravitation) is impressed upon

But as observations grow more numerous and more precise, and comet
in the number of elliptic orbits at the expense of the parabolic ones,
considerable percentage of them have their velocities slowed down
planets as by the resistance offered to their motion by meteor particles
 A striking instance of what may befall a
 117, where the tail of a comet
collision with a meteor swarm.
offered by the comet which bears the name of Encke.
time less than that of any other known comet, and at intervals of forty
orbit than before, unquestionably on account of some resistance which it

[Illustration: FIG.
--Brooks's comet, October 21, 1893.
]
179.
--We saw in § 174 that the sun's action
same tendency to break up is true of comets whose attenuated substance
 According to the mathematical
tend first to draw it out on line with the sun, just as the earth's
the lighter part of the comet's substance to flow away from both ends of
 This destructive action of the sun is not limited to
pieces as well; but the densities and the resulting mutual attractions

As a curiosity of mathematical analysis we may note that a spherical
at the earth's distance from the sun, will be broken up and dissipated
exceeds two yards.
whose extreme tenuity, however, suggests what we have already learned of
outflow of particles at both ends of the diameter directed toward the
 Something of this kind actually occurs, for the tail of a comet
from the sun, as is shown in Fig.
up toward the sun; but an inspection of Fig.
and the envelope are too unlike to be produced by one and the same set

It was long ago suggested that the sun possibly exerts upon a comet's
call gravity.
force which a charge of electricity exerts upon a similar charge placed
considerable store of electricity upon their surfaces this would furnish
comets' tails; for the force of gravity would operate between the
force, while the electric charges would produce a repulsion, relatively
electric charge lies wholly on the surface, while gravity permeates the
(electric charge) increases rapidly with increasing size.
force would thrust back toward the comet those particles which flowed
from it, thus producing the difference in appearance between tail and
tails strongly curved backward.
Bredichin has made a careful study of the shape and positions of comets'
theories of electric repulsion.

 COMET TAILS.
something like the following process: In the head of the comet itself a
perhaps, which, as they no longer cling together, may be described as in
 By the repellent action of both sun and comet
in the direction opposite to the sun with different velocities, the
stream away from a smokestack, making for the comet a tail which like a
 The result
 118, where the positions of the comet
the broken lines represent the paths of molecules _m^{I}_, _m^{II}_,
, expelled from it on their several dates and traveling
attraction, the sun's repulsion, and the comet's repulsion.
attraction (gravity) is too small to be taken into account.
drawn upward from _VI_ represents the positions of these molecules on
pointing nearly away from the sun.
dates gives the corresponding positions of the tail, always pointing

[Illustration: FIG.
--Formation of a comet's tail.

 g.
from the comet so rapidly as is here shown.
carbon and iron, would be repelled as strongly by the electric forces,
thus producing a much slower separation between them and the head of the
 Construct a figure such as the above, in which the molecules
 118, and
 Instead of
side, as is the large plume-shaped tail of the Donati comet shown in
 101.
like the theoretical one of Fig.
 We have here two distinct types of
unusual type, even more strongly bent to one side of the line joining
 The existence of
all satisfactorily accounted for by the supposition that they are made
 The relative molecular weights of hydrogen, some
molecules would behave just as do the actual tails observed and
 The spectroscope shows that these
leaves little room for doubt of the essential soundness of Bredichin's

181.
--We must regard the tail as waste matter
is very small, it must in some measure diminish the comet's mass.
process is, of course, most active at the time of perihelion passage,
ones which move in elliptic orbits must do, this waste of material may

small and inconspicuous, not one of them showing a tail of any
advanced along the road which, in the case of Biela's comet, led to its
 Their fragments are in part strewn through the solar
part they have been carried away from the sun and scattered throughout
they left the comet.

worked out.
which the head has broken up, it is by no means the only one.
Comet of 1882 cast off a considerable number of fragments which moved
have been seen to do the same.
gradual breaking up of the nucleus of the same comet, 1882, II, into a
pointing along the axis of the tail.
 119, which shows the

182.
--The spectrum presented by comets was
much progress has been made toward an understanding of it.
consists of two quite distinct parts--first, a faint background of
and, second, superposed upon this, three bright bands like the carbon
 48, only not so sharply defined.
bands make a discontinuous spectrum quite similar to that given off by
the comet's light originates in the body itself, which must therefore be

[Illustration: FIG.
--The head of the Great Comet of
--WINLOCK.

incandescent, something like the comet spectrum may be artificially
disruptive electrical discharge through a tube in which fragments of
 A flash of lightning is a disruptive
 Now, meteors and electric
with comets, and with this suggestion it is easy to frame a general idea
meteors of different sizes so loosely clustered that the average density
relative to each other, as well as to the sun, and disturbed in that
 Each particle carries its own electric
neighbor, and is ready to leap across the intervening gap whenever two
 To these conditions add the inductive
and artificial distribution of electricity among the comet's particles,
lightning flashes, springing from one particle to another, most frequent
to be separately visible.
the comet in part self-luminous with three kinds of light--i.
, the
the same elements and compounds of the elements--carbon, hydrogen, and
 It is not to
they certainly are not the only ones in the meteor.
ones to detect under ordinary circumstances, but in special cases, like
its whole substance incandescent, the spectrum glows with additional

183.
--A question sometimes asked, What would be the effect
results reached in the preceding sections.
shower, more or less brilliant according to the number and size of the
 If these were like the remains of
collision with a great comet would certainly produce a brilliant
 If the
a few ounces or pounds, the earth's atmosphere would prove a perfect
before they could reach the ground, and leaving the earth uninjured by
 But big
through the air, might work a very different effect, and by their
any such result as the wrecking of the earth, or the destruction of all
 The 40 meteors of § 169 may stand
 Consult the Bible (Joshua x, 11) for





184.
--In the earlier chapters the student has
luminaries which remain year after year in the same constellation,
most perfect known image of immutability.
man saw Orion and the Pleiades much as we see them to-day, although the
altered their risings and settings, and it may be that their luster has

[Illustration: FIG.
--Illustrating the division of the sky into
]
The division of the sky into constellations dates back to the most
irregular boundaries of these constellations, shown by the dotted lines
 120, such as no modern astronomer would devise, are an
our day.
are much more smooth and regular, since this part of the sky, invisible
more modern times.
a figure, often drawn from classical mythology, which was supposed to be
stalking across the sky, with the handle of the Dipper for his tail; Leo
to a rock, etc.
and quite too fanciful to be followed by the ordinary eye.

 THE NUMBER OF STARS.
familiar figure of speech for expressing the idea of countless number,
wrong impression, for, under ordinary circumstances, in a clear sky
they do not exceed 3,000 or 4,000, the exact number depending upon
 Test your
 Six are easily seen,
seen, there will be a vague impression of more just beyond the limit of
popular exaggeration of the number of the stars.
half of what we call starlight comes from stars which are separately too
for their individual faintness.

can obtain access to a small telescope, or even an opera glass, should
vague stream of light breaks up into shining points, each an independent
 These faint stars, which are found in every part of the sky as
recognition of the fact that they can be seen only in the telescope,

186.
--The telescopic stars show among themselves an even
magnitudes (§ 9) has accordingly been extended to include them, the
being of the sixteenth or seventeenth magnitude, while, as we have
the lucid ones are of the sixth magnitude.
light received from the stars with that from the planets, and
prolong the scale of magnitudes backward into the negative numbers, and
number -26.
 The full moon's stellar magnitude is -12, and the planets
 Even a very few of the stars are
relation to the fainter ones.
fixed stars, is of the -1 magnitude, and such stars as Arcturus and Vega

The relation of these magnitudes to each other has been so chosen that a
5 times as bright as
method of comparing the amount of light received from different stars.
Thus the brightness of Venus is 2.
5 times that of Sirius.
moon is 2.
; only it should be
5 is not exactly the value of the _light
 Strictly this ratio is the
5119+, so that to be entirely accurate we must say that
brightness.
brightness (quantity of light) of two stars whose magnitudes are _m_ and


or Spica, than a star just visible to the naked eye? How many of the
one star just visible to the unaided eye? How many full moons must be
How large a part of the visible hemisphere would they occupy?
187.
--The brightness of all the lucid
designed for that special purpose, and the following table shows,
sky, from pole to pole, which are brighter than the several magnitudes

0 is    11
0 "     39
0 "    142
0 "    463
0 "  1,483
0 "  4,326
It must not be inferred from this table that there are in the whole sky
 The actual number is probably
as faint as the magnitude 6.
5, the discordance between this
of the naked-eye vision, having been introduced in the attempt to make
only rough and approximate.
the introduction of fractional numbers to represent gradations of
 Thus of the 2,843
proportion are said to be of the 5.
2 magnitude, and so on
9 magnitude, even hundredths of a magnitude being sometimes

We have found the number of stars included between the fifth and sixth
the number immediately preceding it, and similarly we may find the
follows:
    Magnitude       0    1    2     3     4       5       6
    4 × 3^{m}         12   36   108   324     972   2,916
In the last line each number after the first is found by multiplying the
with that printed above it shows that on the whole, as far as the table
those a magnitude brighter.

completely, and their exact number is unknown; but if we apply our
shall find for the fainter stars--those of the tenth and twelfth
these are probably too small, since down to the ninth or tenth magnitude
magnitude to magnitude in more than a threefold ratio.
in some degree by the less rapid increase which is known to exist in
these variations in the rate of increase, we obtain as a rude
magnitude, 86,000,000.
the number of stars visible in nearly 8,000 sample regions of the sky,
find it to contain 58,500,000 stars; but the magnitude of the faintest
uncertain.

do the 2,843 stars of magnitude 5.
0? How many tenth-magnitude

of the stars to their different distances from us; but such was not the
fastened to a "crystal sphere," which carried them with it, all at the
 In breaking away
an atmospheric illusion through which we look to stars at very different
think of the stars as being much alike one with another, and, like
of uniformity, so that in every direction there should be found in equal
proportioned to its remoteness.

 DISTANCES OF THE STARS.
the false in this last mode of thinking about the stars, we need some
encounter what is perhaps the most delicate and difficult problem in the
 As shown in Fig.
principles involved in determining these distances are not fundamentally
the earth.
earth's orbit and the position of the earth at different times of the
 The direction of the star _A_ at these several times is shown by
furnished by the sky.
and it is readily seen that owing to the changing position of the
appear to move upon the background in orbits shaped like that of the
star's distance, the apparent orbit of _A_ being larger than that of
 By measuring the angular distance
 g.
_A--Jan.
change in this angle how much larger is the one path than the other, and
 Strictly, the difference
the angles subtended at _A_ and _B_ by the diameter of the earth's
--B--July_ were
_Jan.

known, can you make a graphical construction that will determine the

 121.
]
The angle subtended at _A_ by the radius of the earth's orbit--i.
,
--A--July_)--is called the star's parallax, and this is
of expressing it in linear units such as miles or radii of the earth's
 The distance of a star is equal to the radius of the earth's
number 206265.

always gives what is called a relative parallax--i.
, the difference
select for _B_ a star or stars supposed to be much farther off than _A_,
they are called are as near or nearer than _A_, and give a negative
 e.
to be negative, as it must whenever the star _B_ is nearer than _A_.

by Struve and Bessel a little prior to 1840, and since that time the
reliability, although the parallaxes themselves are so small--never as
error, since even for the nearest star the problem of its distance is
by looking at it first with one eye and then with the other.
base line.

 THE SUN AND HIS NEIGHBORS.
neighbors among the stars are shown in Fig.
having the sun at their center represent distances from it equal
and sun.
corresponds to its right ascension, as shown by the Roman numerals about
of course, be shown upon the flat surface of the paper, but it may be
through an angle, as seen from the sun, equal to its declination, as

in which the numbers in the first column are those placed adjacent to

[Illustration: FIG.
--Stellar neighbors of the sun.

 LIGHT YEARS.
 122, 1,000,000
to express the stellar distances, and in the preceding table the
unit.
multiplied by 93,000,000,000,000.
25,000,000,000,000 miles away.
use--i.
, the distance traveled over by light in the period of one
 We have already found (§ 141) that it requires light 8m.
 to
this datum that in a year light moves over a space equal to 63,368 radii
 This distance is called a _light year_, and the
unit, is 4.
 e.
star to the earth.

 122 the stellar magnitudes of the stars are indicated by the
inspection of the figure will serve to show that within a radius of 30
together, and that, so far as distance is concerned, the sun is only a
nearest neighbor, are of the same order of magnitude as those which

Fig.
 Doubtless other stars will be
earth's orbit, but it is not probable that they will ever suffice to
 The vast

191.
--It is evident that these stars are too far apart
and that we have here a case in which, according to § 34, each star is
velocity along a straight line.
that they are at rest, and so astronomers long believed.
B.
) and Ptolemy (130 A.
) observed and recorded many allineations
settling this very question of a possible motion of the stars and a
 For example,
Capella, ε Persei, α and β Arietis, stood in a straight line--i.
,
 Verify this by direct reference to the
nearly twenty centuries.
maps, and the fourth, ε Persei, is a third-magnitude star between

Other allineations given by Ptolemy are: Spica, Arcturus and β Bootis;

centuries ago it, together with Aldebaran and Sirius, was on other
Ptolemy.
impetus to observing with all possible accuracy the right ascensions and
was called _proper motion_--i.
, a motion peculiar to the individual
produced for all stars by the precession.

thousands of observations of this kind, whose results have gone into
a photographic survey of the sky that is intended to record permanently
heavens down to the fourteenth magnitude, with a view to ultimately

The complete achievement of this result is, of course, a thing of the
been made during the past century and a half to show that nearly every
very small, there being less than 100 known stars in which it amounts
 e.
would require nearly the whole Christian era to alter a star's direction
 The most rapid known
and the south pole, which changes its position at the rate of nearly 9"
the northern sky, No.
 122.
place in a list of large proper motions that we find a bright lucid
 1 of Fig.
 It is a significant fact that for the most part

 This connection
expect to find, since a given amount of real motion of the star along
nearer the star is to the earth, and this fact has guided astronomers in
determined first and the parallax afterward.

 THE PATHS OF THE STARS.
that the orbit along which a star moves is practically a straight line,
the sky, it appears that these orbits point in all possible ways--north,
nearly toward or from the sun; others are square to the line joining sun
between these two.
is well illustrated in Fig.
shooting stars a tremendous proper motion across the sky, but sees
motionless, although, in fact, they are moving quite as rapidly as are
 The fixed star resembles the shooting star in this
which lies at right angles to the line of sight, and this needs to be
line of sight, in order to give us any knowledge of the star's real

[Illustration: FIG.
--Motion of Polaris in the line of sight as
 FROST.

 MOTION IN THE LINE OF SIGHT.
that anything whatever has been accomplished in determining these
progress has been made by applying the Doppler principle (§ 89) to the
telescope in the world is engaged upon work of this kind.
of the lines of the spectrum toward the violet or toward the red end of
star, but this shifting, which must be determined by comparing the
lines, is so small in amount that its accurate measurement is a matter
 123.
along its central line a part of the spectrum of Polaris, between wave
corresponding parts of the spectrum of an electric spark whose light
plate with that of Polaris.
be, a discontinuous or bright-line one, while the spectrum of the star
have no corresponding lines in the comparison spectrum.
number of lines in the two spectra do correspond, save that the dark
lengths, showing that this star is approaching the earth.
was photographed for the express purpose of determining the star's

without comparison spectra by allowing the star's light to pass through
 The lower section of
out its details in a way not visible to the unaided eye.
spectrum of β Aurigæ a rate of motion equal to that of the
03 of a

[Illustration: FIG.
--Spectrum of β Aurigæ.
]
Despite the difficulty of dealing with such small quantities as the
known that the velocities of stars in the line of sight are of the same
ranging all the way from 0 to 60 miles per second--more than 200,000
rate at which μ Cassiopeiæ is approaching the sun.

proper motions and the motions determined spectroscopically: the latter
are expressed in angular measure, seconds of arc, and there can be no
of the stars their proper motions are converted from angular into linear
 We are brought thus to the very heart of the matter; parallax,
quantities, all of which are essential to a knowledge of the real

[Illustration: FIG.
--Spectrum of Pollux.
]
194.
--An illustration of how they may be made to work
Dipper--β, γ, ε, and ζ Ursæ Majoris, whose proper motions have
to be nearly equal in amount.
stars are all moving toward the sun with approximately the same
 One other star of the Dipper, δ Ursæ
line of sight has not yet been determined with the spectroscope.
similar motions make it probable that the stars are really traveling
that such is the case it is quite possible to write out a set of
the line of sight, together with their unknown distances and the unknown
 Solving
that the five stars probably lie in a plane which is turned nearly
as fast as the earth moves around the sun, and are at a distance from us
02"--i.
, six times as great
 122.
stars which, although separated from each other by distances as great as
 122, yet move along in parallel paths which it
equally difficult to frame an explanation.

 126.
]
The stars α and η of the Great Dipper do not share in this motion, and
destruction of the Dipper's shape.
 126 illustrates this change of
they were grouped at a remote epoch in the past, while the lower
future.
configurations, but it should be observed that in each of them the stars
also keep together, the entire change of appearance being due to the

This phenomenon of groups of stars moving together is called _star
of the sky.
some sixty or more stars are found traveling together along similar
 Repeated careful measurements of the relative positions of stars
telescopic ones do not share in this motion, and therefore are not to be
for a time, chance to be nearly on line with the Pleiades, and probably

To rightly appreciate the extreme slowness with which proper motions
changes shown in passing from one section of Fig.
represent the effect of the present proper motions of the stars
 Will the stars continue to

 THE SUN'S WAY.
proper motions and motions in the line of sight is the determination
 The principle involved is
 If the sun moves with respect to the stars and carries
space, our changing point of view must displace in some measure every
sun's motion, and even these will show its effect by their apparent
 So far as their
more stars move north than south, or that more go east than west; and
a point somewhere near the bright star Vega and to converge toward a
from any general drift of the stars in that direction, but that it marks
 That it is moving along a straight
which the spectroscope shows in the line of sight, comes from the motion
 Working along these lines, Kapteyn finds that the
which is decidedly below the average rate of stellar motion--19 miles

196.
--By combining this rate of
different magnitudes, it is possible to obtain some idea of the average
which, while it gives no information about the actual distance of any
remote.
 By far the larger
respectively Sirian and solar stars, which are readily distinguished
 Thus β
spectrum like that of Fig.
in Fig.
this class.

 122, have spectra
than are the stars with spectra unlike that of the sun.
distance of a solar star of the first magnitude is very approximately
 122, 2,000,000 times the
a Sirian star of the first magnitude is represented by the number

A third-magnitude star is on the average twice as far away as one of the
,
stars, at least down to the eighth magnitude and possibly farther,
 Put in another
and ceased to shine centuries ago, for the light by which we now see
 For
investigation of the mean distances (_D_) of the stars of magnitude



 How long
sixth magnitude?
197.
--The amount of light which comes
distance, and since many of the stars are changing their distance from
brighter or fainter by reason of this altered distance.
distances themselves are so great that the most rapid known motion in
thousand) to produce any perceptible change in brilliancy.

is that the distance must be increased or diminished tenfold in order to
we may apply this law to determine the sun's rank among the stars.
were removed to the distance of an average first-, or second-, or
stars? The average distance of a third-magnitude star of the solar type
earth, and since 4,000,000 = 10^{6.
sun's stellar magnitude would be altered by 6.
would therefore be -26.
0 = 6.
 e.
average distance of the third-magnitude stars of its type would be
 It must therefore be
average star.
look brighter than the stars.

application of the same principles will show how hopeless is the
 If the sun's nearest
planet would furnish to us no more light than does a star of the
 e.
would remain invisible in the most powerful telescope yet built, even
 Let the student
magnitude of Jupiter to be -1.

198.
--In the constellation Taurus, not far from Aldebaran,
consist of two stars close together.
double, and a sharp eye can detect that one of the faint stars which


In the strict language of astronomy the term double star would not be
restricted to those stars whose angular distance from each other is so
to the naked eye--i.
, their angular separation is measured by a few
which separate the component stars of θ Tauri or α Capricorni.
found in the sky many thousands of these close double stars, of which
 e.
earth but at very different distances from it--while more of them are
enough to influence each other's motion.
systems, and in cases of this kind the principles of celestial mechanics
component of a double star moving in a conic section of some kind,

to those which occur in the solar system, and careful telescopic
of the two stars--i.
, their angular separation, which it is customary
is called _position angle_.

 ORBITS OF DOUBLE STARS.
such a double star, whose position angle and distance have been measured
Fig.
 Each black dot
an observed direction and distance of the fainter of the two stars from
intersection of the lines inside the ellipse.
that during this time the one star has gone completely around the other,
an ellipse having one of its foci at the center of gravity of the two
 The other star moves in an ellipse of precisely similar shape,
inversely proportional to the masses of the two bodies, but it is
smaller one an orbit whose diameter is equal to the sum of the diameters
 This practice, which has been followed in Fig.
127, gives correctly the relative positions of the two stars, and makes

[Illustration: FIG.
--The orbit of α Centauri.
]
In Fig.
ellipse marked out by the smaller one, and from this we infer that the
distorted, foreshortened, by the fact that we look obliquely down upon
 It is possible, however, by mathematical analysis, to find
to bring the focus of the ellipse up to the position of the principal
 See Fig.
for a case in which the true orbit is turned exactly edgewise toward the
shown in the figure, appears to oscillate to and fro along a straight
figure.

axis 47 times, and a minor axis 40 times, as great as the distance of
 The orbit, in fact, is intermediate in size
star in this orbit is 81 years, a little less than the period of Uranus.

 128.
star 42 Comæ Berenicis.
]
200.
--If we apply to this orbit Kepler's Third

5)^3 / (81)^2 = k (M + m),
where _M_ and _m_ represent the masses of the two stars.
seen that _k_, the gravitation constant, is equal to 1 when the masses
_a_ are expressed in years and radii of the earth's orbit respectively,
_M_ + _m_ = 2.
 e.
α Centauri is equal to rather more than twice the mass of the sun.
not every double star to which this process of weighing can be applied.
The major axis of the orbit, _a_, is found from the observations in
the star is known that this can be converted into the required linear
the parallax; 47 = 35" ÷ 0.

Our list of distances (§ 189) contains four double stars whose periodic
the accompanying table the information which they give about the masses

  STAR.

 | axis.
    |
  α Centauri           |  47   |  40   |   81 y.
  70 Ophiuchi          |  56   |  48   |   88     |   3
  Sirius               |  43   |  34   |   52     |   4

much the same size as these double-star orbits; but the planetary orbits
substantial difference between the long and short diameters of their
 This is a characteristic feature of most double-star orbits, and
average, the longer the time required by a star to make its orbital

Another element of the orbits of double stars, which stands in even
long diameter of the orbit the more rapid is the motion and the shorter
double-star orbits devote themselves by preference to those stars whose
from the other in the telescope.

much the same size and with much the same periodic time as those in
double stars, many of which have periods running up into the hundreds if
in periods comparable with, or even shorter than, that of Jupiter.

 DARK STARS.
table, calls for some special mention, as the determination of its mass
stars.
motion was not straight and uniform after the fashion of ordinary stars,
on the rim of a swiftly running bicycle wheel.
forward with uniform velocity, but the point near the tire goes up and
sometimes ahead of it, sometimes behind, and such seemed to be the
 Bessel, who discovered it, did
visible change of the star's motion pointed to the presence of an unseen
such effects as the visible companions produce in the motions of double
 A new kind of star, dark instead of bright, was added to the
existence of many more.
argument against the existence of as many more invisible ones.
is no reason to think radiance a necessary property of celestial
" But most astronomers were incredulous, and it was not until
dark star was brought to light and the companion of Sirius actually
 The visual discovery of the dark companion of Procyon is of still
telescope of the Lick Observatory.
orbit is still very uncertain, being based almost wholly upon the
must be very nearly correct, the mass of the stars and dimensions of the

The companion of Sirius is about ten magnitudes and that of Procyon
 How much more
tremendous difference of brightness represented by the answer to this
companion, and for Procyon the ratio does not exceed five or six.

them from the list of dark stars, but others still remain unseen,
variable orbital motion, as in the case of ζ Cancri, where one
series of loops whose presence indicates a disturbing body which has

202.
--Combinations of three, four, or more stars close
while they are far from being as common as are double stars, there is a
than 10,000 double stars that are known.
subject to the law of gravitation admits of no serious doubt, but
presented, and no astronomer has ever been able to determine what will

[Illustration: FIG.
--Illustrating the motion of a spectroscopic
]
203.
--In the year 1890 Professor Pickering, of
double stars, invisible as such in even the most powerful telescope,
showing in their spectrum that two or more bodies must be present in the
star.
 129 we suppose _A_ and _B_ to be the two components of a
gravity, _C_, whose distance from the earth is several million times
 Under such
which would appear fused into one; but the smaller the orbit the more
edgewise toward the earth, as is supposed in the figure, whenever the
approaching the earth by reason of its orbital motion, while _B_ would
lines composing their respective spectra would be shifted in opposite
breaking up into two, like the double-sodium line _D_, only not spaced
 When the stars have moved a quarter way round their orbit
the line of sight and the spectrum returns to the normal type with
revolution their velocities are again parallel with the line of sight.
The interval of time between consecutive doublings of the lines in the
 The
Doppler principle how fast the stars are traveling, and this in
we assume that it is turned exactly edgewise to the earth.
assumption may not be quite true, but even though the orbit should
phenomenon of the double lines whose displacement will now show
since the spectroscope measures only that component of the whole
that the real orbits and masses of these _spectroscopic binaries_, as
the spectroscope, since it is only in exceptional cases that the orbit

The bright star Capella is an excellent illustration of these
 At intervals of a little less than a month the
separation corresponding to a velocity in the line of sight amounting to
 Each component of a doubled line appears to be
is single, thus indicating equal velocities and equal masses for the two
 From
the student show that the diameter of the orbit--i.
, the distance of
their combined mass is a little less than that of α Centauri, provided

There are at the present time (1901) 34 spectroscopic binaries known,
Aurigæ, ζ Ursæ Majoris, etc.
about one star out of every seven whose motion in the line of sight
possibly triple.
times are much shorter than those of the ordinary double stars, and
case of η Pegasi, which has the longest known period of any star of this

Spectroscopic binaries agree with ordinary double stars in having masses
of a mass ten times as great as that of the sun.

 VARIABLE STARS.
fact that some stars shine with a changing brightness--e.
, Algol, the
furnishes three times as much light as when at its minimum, and other
 The star ο Ceti has
of brightness, more than six-hundred-fold.
time this star is invisible to the naked eye, but during some three
quite rapidly to its maximum brilliancy, which is sometimes that of a
magnitude, and, after shining for a few weeks with nearly maximum
to its maximum brightness after an interval of eleven months from the
 In 1901 it should reach its greatest brilliancy about
 Find
to night with neighboring stars of about the same magnitude see how it

The interval of time from maximum to maximum of brightness--331.
for Mira--is called the star's period, and within its period a star
the weather runs through its cycle of changes in the period of a year.
But, as there are wet years and dry ones, hot years and cold, so also
pronounced between different periods, and one such difference has
different in different years.
fluctuates in many cases, as does every other circumstance connected
notoriously unreliable.

 THE ALGOL VARIABLES.
present an almost perfect regularity, repeating their changes time after
 Algol is one type of these
8154 hours, during six sevenths
3
to the 3.
Fig.
 The horizontal scale here represents hours, reckoned from the
stellar magnitudes.
we may read from it that at any time between 5h.
 after the time
32; at 2h.
magnitude is 2.
 What is the magnitude an hour and a half before

 130.
]
The arrows shown in Fig.
curves, but in this case each one represents a spectroscopic
 These
plotted in the figure with reference to the number of hours each one
not only the direction of the star's motion along the line of sight, the
also its velocity, each square of the ruling corresponding to 10
2 miles per second).
adjacent arrows come mainly from errors of observation and furnish some
can be no doubt that before minimum the star is moving away from the
 It is evident from these
one of whose components is a dark star which, once in each revolution,
its light.
variations in the star's light, Vogel finds that the bright star, Algol,
low density, so that its mass is less than half that of the sun, while
quarter of its mass.
bright, is 3,200,000 miles.
 129, which is drawn to scale, shows the
which they move.

considerable numbers is sufficient to make it probable that a certain
edgewise toward the earth as to produce eclipses, and corresponding to
Algol type of eclipse variables, and only a beginning has been made in

[Illustration: FIG.
--The light curve of β Lyræ.

 VARIABLES OF THE β LYRÆ TYPE.
is a certain further number of binary variables in which both components
different course.
were directed exactly toward the earth, and the fact that its light is
orbit.
 131 represents the light curve of one of the best-known
period is 12 days 21.
the magnitude of the star for different times during this interval.
According to Myers, this light curve and the spectroscopic observations
character, such as is shown, together with its orbit and a scale of
 132.
the other, thus changing their shapes from spheres into ellipsoids.
astonishing dimensions of these stars are in part compensated by their
are respectively only 10 times and 21 times that of the sun! But these
upon spectroscopic observations of doubtful interpretation.
 132
that their combined light should give β Lyræ its maximum

 132.
--MYERS.

 VARIABLES OF LONG AND SHORT PERIODS.
all variable stars are binaries which eclipse each other.
larger part of them, like Mira, are not to be accounted for in this way,
periods is significant in this connection.
number of variable stars with periods shorter than a month, and there
having periods longer than 18 months, or intermediate between 1 month
into two classes--those of long period, 6 months or more, and those of
to some real difference in the stars themselves is further marked by the
the short-period stars are almost without exception white or very pale
 In fact, the longer the period the redder the star, although it
percentage of them shine with constant light.
variability holds good only for short-period variables, and possibly not
explanation which commands the general assent of astronomers, although

The number of stars known to be variable is about 400, while a
surprising if a large fraction of all the stars should be found to
 The sun's spots may suffice to make it

The discovery of new variables is of frequent occurrence, and may be
for them by the ingenious device suggested by Pickering and illustrated
 133.
 g.
photographed repeatedly upon the same plate, which is shifted a little
it.
each star, and if the star's light is constant the images in any given
 133; but
by the broken aspect of its row of dots, a minimum brilliancy being
 In this particular case,
plate.

 133.
photography.
]
208.
--Next to the variable stars of very long or very
appear for the most part suddenly, and after a brief time either vanish
 These were formerly
new world"--and it is noteworthy that no new star is recorded to have
 D.
no less than five of them visible to the naked eye and others
 In so far as these new stars are not ordinary variables
commonly supposed due to chance encounters between stars or other cosmic
very close to each other.
with high velocities is clearly sufficient to produce a luminous
 g.
stars, might result in tidal actions which would rend open their crusts
a very great accession of brightness.

Brahe's report, appeared in the year 1572, and was so bright when at its
 It continued
disappeared to the naked eye, although there is some reason to suppose
the constellation Cassiopeia, whose light still shows traces of

No modern temporary star approaches that of Tycho in splendor, but in
possible to apply the spectroscope to the analysis of their light and to
would have been suspected from its light changes alone.

since that of Tycho, appeared suddenly in the constellation Perseus in
 But
those of a variable star, and at the present time (September, 1902) it
a star of the ninth or tenth magnitude.

waning brilliancy a ring of faint nebulous matter was detected
series of nebulæ had been thrown off by the star at the time of its
 But the extraordinary velocity of this nebular
almost incredible, and astronomers are more inclined to believe that the
meteoric matter, into which a rapidly moving dark star plunged and,
incandescence by the collision.
explanation of these extraordinary phenomena, it is possible to show
the rate at which the nebula spread, that the distance of Nova Persei,
one-hundredth of a second, a result that is, in substance, confirmed by

Another modern temporary star is Nova Aurigæ, which appeared suddenly in
reappear three months later for another season of renewed brightness.
The spectra of both these modern Novæ contain both dark and bright lines
Doppler effect that would be produced by two or more glowing bodies
 But the most
spectra of temporary stars still a subject of debate among astronomers,
of the stars themselves.
one time the sun's chromosphere, at another time the conditions that are





209.
--We have already seen that one star differs from
student of the sky will not fail to observe for himself how the luster
other stars in the heavens, while at the other end of the scale
even deeper tone of red.
shows a mixture of the rainbow hues, in which a very pale yellow is the
the scale and red at the other.
or violet stars, save in one exceptional class of cases--viz.
two components of a double star are of very different brightness, it is
almost without exception, the color of the fainter star lies nearer to
and sometimes shows a distinctly blue or green hue.
double star is β Cygni, in which the components are respectively
as the blue one.

stellar colors, yellow and red, but no color of shorter wave length, has
difficulties.
energy of every wave length within the limits of the visible spectrum,
 If this radiant energy could come
surrounded by atmospheres--analogous to the chromosphere and reversing
like the earth's atmosphere, take a heavier toll from the violet than
 The greater the absorption in the
light, and corresponding to this the red stars are as a class fainter

210.
--The spectroscope is pre-eminently the
atmospheres, just as it deals with that absorption in the sun's
although the faintness of starlight, compared with that of the sun,
 Despite this difficulty most of
the spectroscope and found to be similar to the sun and the earth as
 Such familiar chemical
broadcast throughout the visible universe, and while it would be
contain nothing not found in the earth and the sun, it is evident that
the solar system, and is subject to the same physical and chemical laws
 Galileo and Newton extended to the heavens the
the nineteenth century to show that the physics and chemistry of the sky

211.
--When the spectra of great numbers of stars are
the colors of the stars, as, indeed, we should expect, since spectrum
useful to classify these spectra into three types, as follows:
_Type I.
_--Speaking generally, the stars which are white
from which they take their name, or that of β Aurigæ (Fig.
124), which is a continuous spectrum, especially rich in energy of short
 e.
relatively small number of heavy dark lines corresponding to the
 Sometimes, however, these lines are much fainter
ones pointing to the presence of other metallic substances in the star's
 These metallic lines are not always present, and sometimes
always rich in violet and ultraviolet light.

proportion of energy of short wave length (§ 118), the richness of these
probably surpassing in some considerable measure that of the sun.
with this type of spectrum are more numerous than all others combined,

 Solar stars.
stars, which show spectra like that of the sun, or of Pollux (Fig.

complexity of spectrum and in the number of their absorption lines they
 They are supposed to be at a lower
elements seems present and active in the reversing layer of their
 The strong resemblance which these spectra bear to that of
have spectra of this type, justify us in ranking both them and it as

_Type III.
_--A small number of stars show spectra comparable
 134), in which the blue and the violet
red parts show not only dark lines, but also numerous broad dark bands,
 It is this
of the spectrum, which produces the ruddy color of these stars, while
and their presence .
.
atmospheres of these stars the temperature has sunk so low that chemical
 One of the
in comets.
that the same chemical elements, although present, can not unite one

[Illustration: FIG.
--The spectrum of α Herculis.
]
Most of the variable stars are red and have spectra of the third type;
which are white stars with spectra of the first type.
variable star is therefore one with a dense atmosphere of relatively low
color of these stars by absorbing the major part of their radiant
escape.
little doubt that the fluctuation in the light of these stars is due to
below its photosphere is still uncertain.

 CLASSES OF STARS.
these types of stellar spectra, but the change from one to another is by
from manhood to old age, and along the line of transition are to be
above--e.
, a few stars show not only dark absorption lines in their
 48, point to
atmospheres.
first type, 23 per cent are of the second type, 1 per cent of the third
classification.
same distribution holds, but in the present state of knowledge it is not

That the great number of stars whose spectra have been studied should
which, when supplemented by the further fact of a gradual transition
in the stars we have an innumerable throng of individuals belonging to
sun is only one of these individuals, of something less than medium size
shared by nearly a fourth of all the stars.

 STAR CLUSTERS.
Præsepe as star clusters visible to the naked eye, and to them we may
Berenices.
in a telescope, is the splendid cluster in Hercules, whose appearance in
 135, while Fig.
photograph of the same cluster taken with a very large reflecting
 This is only a type of many telescopic clusters which are
together as to become indistinguishable, one from another, at the center
 Within an area which could be covered by a third of the
stars which are unquestionably close neighbors, but whose apparent

than a thousand stars are included within a radius of 160", the actual
separating earth and sun, but far less than that separating the sun from

[Illustration: FIG 135.
]
An interesting discovery of recent date, made by Professor Bailey in
especially rich in stars, contain an extraordinary number of variable
 Two clusters, one in the
hundred variables, and an even more extraordinary case is presented by
which contains no less than sixty-three variables, all about of the
from half a day, all having light curves of about the same shape, and
magnitude.
unmistakably to a common origin and cause of variability.

 136.
--KEELER.

 137.
telescope.

 138.

]
[Illustration: FIG.
--A drawing of the Andromeda nebula.

 140.
nebula.
]
214.
--Returning to Fig.
hazy appearance, and that at its center the stars can no longer be
cloud.
the picture the inner portion is not so resolved, although in the
the very center of the cluster.
possible, and we have an _irresolvable cluster_ which it is customary to

The most conspicuous example of this in the northern heavens is the
 A.
 + 41°), which may be
 Look for it.
This appears in an opera glass or very small telescope not unlike Fig.
137, which is reproduced from a sketch.
 138 is from a photograph of
figure, but bringing out more detail.
adjoining the large one, and at the bottom of the picture an object
tailless comet that chanced to be passing that part of the sky when the
 Fig.
although it is hardly to be recognized as a representation of the same
center of the picture, is justified in part by Fig.
photograph made with a large reflecting telescope.

 141.
]
A comparison of these several representations of the same thing will
impressions to be derived from nebulæ depend upon the telescopes
 The differences
for half a century ago it was sketched much as shown in the latest of
 140).

 142.
--KEELER.

 TYPICAL NEBULÆ.
in the telescope are shown on a small scale in Fig.
years astronomers have learned to place little reliance upon drawings
made with long exposures in powerful telescopes.
exquisite of these modern photographs is that of the Trifid nebula in
 142).
nebula its name, Trifid, and which run through its brightest parts,
 The area of the sky
full moon.

 143.
--KEELER.

 143 shows a very different type of nebula, found in the
intertwined, and stretches across the sky for a distance considerably

[Illustration: FIG.
--Spiral nebula in Canes Venatici.
]
A much smaller but equally striking nebula is that in the constellation
 144), which shows a most extraordinary spiral
lines toward a center of condensation.
of this nebula, omitting the projection toward the bottom of the
the moon, and its thickness is probably very small compared with its
which compose it.
of this nebula fall on the streams of nebulous matter as if they were
 This characteristic grouping of the stars, which is
parcel of the nebula and not merely on line with it.
 145 shows how

[Illustration: FIG.
--Great nebula about the star ρ
--BARNARD.

(Fig.
ζ Orionis.
unaided eye.
 e.
shapeless--nebula, because it presents no definite form which the eye
 It is "without
curved filaments may be traced streaming away from the brighter parts
 This nebula, as shown in Fig.
about equal to that of the full moon, without counting as any part of
suitable exposures show that faint outlying parts of the nebula extend
 Indeed,
with nebulous light whose brighter portions, if each were counted as a
the hundreds of thousands.

 146.
]
The Pleiades (Plate IV) present a case of a resolvable star cluster
should be noted in the figure.
in wisps extending from one star to the next, after the fashion of a
the cluster and not merely a background for it.


 147 shows a series of so-called double nebulæ perhaps comparable
indicate that they are really faint spiral nebulæ in which only the

According to Keeler, the spiral is the prevailing type of nebulæ, and
 144 presents the most perfect example of such a nebula, the
 140)
true shape, the nebula being turned nearly edgewise toward us so that

[Illustration: FIG.
--Double nebulæ.
]
Another type of nebula of some consequence presents in the telescope
given them the name _planetary nebulæ_.
 138, if
 Sometimes
hollow, like a smoke ring, and is then called a ring nebula.
famous of these is in the constellation Lyra, not far from Vega.

 SPECTRA OF NEBULÆ.
shows, of course, stellar spectra, and even when irresolvable the
although they stand too close together to be separately seen.
certain number of nebulæ the spectrum is altogether different, a
the nebular light comes from glowing gases which are subject to no
 The planetary nebulæ all have spectra of this
 It is
green shimmer in the light of certain nebulæ which led him to believe
abundantly confirmed by the spectroscope.
caused by a line in the green part of the spectrum that is always
nebulæ.

spectrum, but in brighter ones two or three other and fainter lines are
Orion, may show a considerable number of extra lines, but for the most
substances.
are well marked in most spectra of gaseous nebulæ, and there are

217.
--It is known from laboratory experiments that
diminishes the number of lines contained in its spectrum, and we may
spectra that the gas which produces them has a very small density.
this is far from showing that the nebula itself is correspondingly
exists in the nebula; so far as telescope or camera are concerned, there
seen because it sends to us no light.
connection of meteoric dust or the stuff of which comets are made, for
and may, perchance, extend out to the region of the nebulæ.

we see, the total amount of matter, invisible as well as visible, must
space occupied by such a nebula as that of Orion is so great that if the
mass by its attraction would exert a sensible effect upon the motion of
 The brighter parts of this nebula as seen from
nothing of its distance from us, it is easy to see that the farther it
of bulk and mass with increasing distance will just compensate the
angular diameter--e.
, half a degree--the force with which this nebula
distance.
tend to move it and the planets in an orbit about the attracting center
points of view, and this changed point of view should produce a change
 e.
whose amount would depend upon the attracting force, and therefore upon
 Observations of the Orion nebula
than half a second of arc per year, and corresponding to this amount of
times (10^{10} according to Ranyard) less than that of air at sea
 e.
with that of those upper parts of the earth's atmosphere in which

218.
--The extreme minuteness of their proper motions
 Indeed, there is hardly a
dozen or more of them show velocities in the line of sight ranging in
increasing distance.
apparent and due to the motion of earth and sun through space, a part at
 These seem to move
velocities as do the stars, and their smaller proper motions across the
from us.
or star cluster.

 148.
]
The law of gravitation presumably holds sway within these bodies, and
within them, although attracted by each other, have shown little or no
their low density and feeble attraction.
seem to be in progress within a nebula changes of brightness, so that
versa_; but, on the whole, even these changes are very small.

 149.
--BARNARD.

 THE MILKY WAY.
another feature of the sky, the _galaxy_ or _Milky Way_, with whose
direct study of the thing itself.
 148 and 149 are from photographs
which it is composed.
the naked eye, although their combined light is easily seen.
course of the galaxy across the heavens is shown in the star maps, but
eye may detect in it.
into segments, here and there a hole as if the ribbon of light had been
examination.

 150.
--BARNARD.

completely girdling the sky and having its north pole in the
 The width of this stream of light is very
widest, in Lyra and Cygnus, to something more than 30°, although its
measurement.
opposite Vega, and note how even an opera glass will partially resolve
brighter than in other parts of its course.
stars is only partial, and there still remains a background of
 Fig.
region in which, although each fleck of light represents a separate
 Compare with this region,
a little west of Altair.
little north and east of α Cygni, and between the extremes of abundance
light.

thought, but a clear and moonless night is required to bring out its
 The nature of these details, the structure of the galaxy, its
stars and nebulæ in general, have been subjects of much speculation by
called the _construction of the heavens_.

 DISTRIBUTION OF THE STARS.
extend? Are they limited or infinite in number? Do they form a system of
itself, without reference to the others? Here is what has been well
of well-founded ideas about the distribution of the stars.
of the ideas upon this subject which have been advanced by eminent
wrong, and few of their speculations along this line are demonstrably
demand at least a brief consideration.
speculative side we need to collect facts upon which to build, and

Parallaxes, proper motions, motions in the line of sight, while
since they are far too scanty in number and relate only to limited
sun.
the stars and the way in which they seem scattered in the sky.
casual survey of the heavens is enough to show that the stars are not
 The lucid stars are abundant in some regions,
stars in sample regions of the sky, which have been made by the
uniformity in distribution is even more markedly true of the telescopic

The rate of increase in the number of stars from one magnitude to the
their distribution.
in distant regions of space the stars were on the average as numerous
stars of any particular magnitude ought to be four times as numerous as
 g.
sixth-magnitude stars as there are fifth-magnitude ones.
already seen in § 187, by actual count there are only three times as
threefold increase instead of a fourfold one, we must conclude that on
numerous than in the remoter depths of space.

 THE STELLAR SYSTEM.
altogether lawless and chaotic; there are traces of order and system,
 Telescope and
although quite irregularly scattered along its course, are on the
and which thin out as we recede from it on either side, at first rapidly
 This tendency to cluster along the Milky Way is
the brighter ones, for the lucid stars and the telescopic ones down to
clustering tendency, are not more than three times as numerous in the
 It is remarkable as
stars in the sky which are brighter than the second magnitude are
of the galaxy.

there are peculiarities in the distribution of certain classes of stars
 Planetary nebulæ and new stars are seldom, if
spectra especially affect this region of the sky.
the first type--Sirian stars--are much more strongly condensed toward
this the Milky Way is peculiarly rich in light of short wave lengths.
Resolvable star clusters are so much more numerous in the galaxy than
their grouping upon a map showing nothing but clusters of this kind.

galaxy, and are found most abundantly in those parts of the sky farthest
along the Milky Way, because already worked up to make the stars which

222.
--The fact that the galaxy is
is a widely extended and comparatively thin stratum of stars within
probably not very far from its center.
be looked upon as a permanent one, since the sun's motion, which lies
relation to the center of that system, and may ultimately carry us

The Milky Way itself is commonly thought to be a ring, or series of
separated from us by a space far greater than the thickness of the ring
 Note in Figs.
bright and dark parts curiously interlaced, and presenting much the
space beyond.
considered as proof that the galaxy is in fact a distant ring, rather
stellar neighbors of the sun into the remotest depths of space,
stars, which are relatively close together while its center is
of stars which on the whole have a tendency to cluster near its plane
where the sun is placed.

 DIMENSIONS OF THE GALAXY.
are wholly unknown, but there can be no doubt that it extends farther in
of the fifteenth and sixteenth magnitudes are common in the galaxy, and
while near the poles of the Milky Way there seem to be few stars fainter
 Herschel, with his telescope of 18 inches
stars per square degree as could Celoria with a telescope of 4 inches
practically the same number of stars, indicating that here even the
 Very
 140 was photographed
photographic plate of one of its richest regions Roberts finds it
with no trace of nebulous light between them.

 BEYOND THE MILKY WAY.
space brings us into a region of which less is known, and what lies
 We shrink from
sympathies go out to Lambert's speculation of a universe filled with

but the Andromeda nebula is not altogether unlike a galaxy with a
latitudes, are two remarkable stellar bodies like the Milky Way in
might expect to find independent stellar systems, if such there be.

bear the names of Major and Minor Nubecula.
Herschel, "the Nubecula Major, like the Minor, consists partly of large
in every stage of resolution up to perfectly resolved stars like the
.
 of globular
sufficiently insulated and condensed to come under the designation of
" Its outlines are vague and somewhat uncertain, but
 e.
the bowl of the Big Dipper--and within this area Herschel counted
to be met with in any other region of the heavens.
excessive complexity of detail baffled Herschel's attempts at artistic
show the Nubecula Major to be an enormous spiral nebula made up of

Compared with the Andromeda nebula, its greater angular extent suggests
the parallax of either seem hopeless.
common to both suggests that the Milky Way itself may be a gigantic
cluster of stars which is roughly globular in shape, but flattened at
 However
hypothesis, although vigorously advocated by Easton, who bases his

225.
--We have had abundant occasion to learn
cosmic dust, is profusely scattered, and it appears not improbable that
of space.
a path requiring many centuries to travel, must be in some measure

remoter stars do not show their true brightness; there is a certain
the universe must be to us a blank.
beams only to have them extinguished before a single mile is passed, and
none the less certain if meteoric dust exists outside the solar system.
If there is such an absorption of light in space, as seems plausible,
infinite, although the most attenuated of dust clouds suffices to
fraction of it and them.


CHAPTER XV
GROWTH AND DECAY

 NATURE OF THE PROBLEM.
universe is alive.
manifests itself not only in the motions of the heavenly bodies along
and atoms, whose vibrations furnish the radiant energy given off by sun
 Some of these activities, such as the motions of the heavenly
others, like the radiation of light and heat, are surely temporary, and
different.
questions of what has been and what is to be.
furnish some account of the universe of yesterday and to-morrow as well
answers to them must be vague and in great measure speculative.

nineteenth century or even the eighteenth, but the sources of
definite; the tenth century presents almost a blank, and the history of
unknown.
heavens, we must expect to find the mists of obscurity grow denser with
lost, and we are compelled to say, beyond this lies the unknown.
account of growth and decay in the universe, therefore, can not aspire
to certain chapters whose epochs lie near to the time in which we live,
of such an inquiry and the limitations which they impose upon us.

 LOGICAL BASES AND LIMITATIONS.
adequate knowledge of the present universe.
past and future lies in an understanding of the present; not necessarily

mystery or crime, and who must commence with the traces that have been
 The foot print, the blood stain, the
of how they came to be; and as a wrong understanding of these elements
the universe as it now is, will surely give a false account of what it
not wholly bar an understanding of the past, but only puts us in the
fails to take note of other facts which might greatly aid him.

laws.
as a year ago, and for aught we know to the contrary it may have been a
prevailed for so long a time is a pure assumption, although a necessary
 So with those other laws of mathematics and
was ever a time or place in which they did not hold true, that time and
inaccessible to scientific research.
knows nothing and can know nothing of a creation or an end of the
periods of time.
of known laws, develop into the present one, is the question with which
standpoint of science this is no idle speculation but an inquiry
laws.

brought to their present condition we seek first of all for lines of
things into something different, and, having found these, to trace their
 Any force, however small, or any
ceaselessly in the same direction, and it is in these processes, whose
future.

 THE SUN'S DEVELOPMENT.
is the shrinking of the sun's diameter which, as we have seen in Chapter
maintained from year to year.
far too small to be measured with any telescope; but it is cumulative,
enough, it will produce in the future, and must have produced in the
changes in its physical condition.

farther back we go the greater shall we expect to find its diameter and

now, and by going far enough back we may even reach a time at which the
 If our
consequence of these, its past career must have been a process of
closer together by their own attraction for each other.
in § 126, this condensation necessarily developed heat, a part of which
up, and served to raise the temperature of the sun to what we find it
 At the present time this temperature is a chief obstacle to further
maintain nearly an equilibrium with them, thus causing a very slow rate
 But it is not probable that this was always so.
In the early stages of the sun's history, when the temperature was low,
been made by the mathematicians to measure its rate of progress and to
present sun from a primitive nebulous condition in which it filled a
 Of course, numerical
consideration of the greatest amount of heat that could be furnished by
period of this development is to be measured in tens of millions or
reach a thousand millions.

 THE SUN'S FUTURE.
radiant energy is surely to be measured in far smaller numbers than
 Its career as a dispenser of light and heat is much more than
which makes its gaseous substance approximate more and more toward the
can not by any further condensation restore the heat whose loss through
 They may continue to shrink, but
dense to obey the laws of gaseous matter its surface must cool rapidly
congeal into a crust which, although at first incandescent, will
portions, save as it may be rent from time to time by volcanic outbursts
 But such outbursts can be of
body, like the earth or moon, no longer available as a source of radiant
 Even before the formation of a solid crust it is quite possible
formation of dense vapors completely enshrouding it, as is now the case
 It is believed that these planets were formerly
through which the earth has passed and toward which the sun is moving.
According to Newcomb, the future during which the sun can continue to
10,000,000 years.

temporary, furnishes a clew to some of the vexing problems of solar
 Thus the sun-spot period, the distribution of the spots in
latitudes, may be, and very probably are, results not of anything now
in the remote past--e.
, an unsymmetrical shrinkage or possibly a
 At sea the waves continue to toss long
the mathematical researches of Wilsing, a profound agitation of the
thousands of years to subside, and during this time its effects would be
things furnishes no apparent cause.

 THE NEBULAR HYPOTHESIS.
contraction as a necessary result of its radiation of energy is
of Nature had been led in quite a different way to the belief that in
extended body whose outer portions reached even beyond the orbit of the
 Laplace, whose speculations upon this subject have had
popular treatise upon astronomy, an admirable statement of the phenomena
the sun's development, and in presenting this theory we shall follow
and many omissions.

we have the following five phenomena: (1) These movements all take place
 (2) The movements of
 (3)
the orbital motions and nearly in the same plane.
satellites alike have nearly circular orbits.
are wholly unlike these by reason of their great eccentricities and
" That these coincidences should be purely
for them, he continues: "Whatever its nature may be, since it has
out to all these bodies, and, in view of the prodigious distances which
great extent which must have enveloped the sun like an atmosphere.
consideration of the planetary motions leads us to think that .
.
sun's atmosphere formerly extended far beyond the orbits of all the
" This is
of the sun's radiant energy; but in Laplace's day the possibility of
was compelled to assume a very high temperature for the primitive
 Whether the
the same way, and would finally result in a star or sun of very high
beginning than if it were cold.

and revolutions of planets and satellites? If these bodies had been
have made them fall into the sun, and we may therefore conjecture that
atmosphere by the condensation of zones of vapor which were cast off in
" Here he proceeds to show by an appeal
that the matter sloughed off by the nebula in the form of a ring,
ultimately condense into a planet, which in its turn might shrink and

[Illustration: PIERRE SIMON LAPLACE (1749-1827).

the beginning of this section, since in every case this motion is an
nebula about its own axis.
having been thus formed from rings which its atmosphere successively
take place in less time than is required for the orbital revolution of
sun as compared with the planets.

 OBJECTIONS TO THE NEBULAR HYPOTHESIS.
slower rate of motion was also supposed to hold true for Saturn's rings
Chapter XI, this ring is made up of a great number of independent
Kepler's Third Law, the motion of the inner edge of the ring with the
must rotate about Saturn more rapidly than the planet turns upon its
 Similarly the inner satellite of Mars completes its revolution in
for objection to the nebular theory.
with the peculiar rotations of Uranus, Neptune, and their satellites
 Do these fortify or weaken his case?
Despite these objections and others equally serious that have been
points that astronomers upon the whole are strongly inclined to accept
development actually followed by the solar system; but at some
 g.
casting off of nebulous rings--the objections are so many and strong as

One proposed modification, much discussed in recent years, consists in
very diffuse cloud of meteoric matter which in the course of its
temperature.
scattered throughout the solar system may be only the fragments left
 Chamberlin and Moulton, who have
of Laplace's views, consider that the primitive nebulous condition must
as to give low mass, high momentum, and irregular distribution to the
part," and they suggest a possible oblique collision of a small nebula

232.
--We should not leave the theory of Laplace without
of Bode's law (§ 134).
geometrical series, and similar geometrical series apply to the

shrinkage of a gaseous body that its radius at any time may be expressed
save that it involves the amount of time that has elapsed since the
 By comparing this formula with the
peculiar spacing of the planets expressed by that law means that they
 e.
as much older than the earth as the earth is older than Venus, etc.
failure of Bode's law in the case of Neptune would then imply that the
than that which has prevailed for the other planets.
stress should not be placed upon this conclusion.
in which the planets came into being continues an open question,

233.
--An important addition to
Prof.
 H.
as to the present condition of things in earth and moon, derives from
conclusions of great interest and importance.
conclusions lies in recognition of the fact that through the influence
for a very long time, a gradual transfer of motion (moment of momentum)
 The earth's motion of rotation is being
bicycle is destroyed by the friction of a brake, and, in consequence of
earth, so that it now moves in a larger orbit than it had some millions

Fig.
tides upon the earth, but in accordance with the third law of motion
whose nature may readily be seen from the same figure.
about its orbit from west to east and the earth rotates about its axis
 The
position in its orbit and by its attraction must tend to pull the moon
whole substance of the earth were placed inside the sphere represented
 It is true that the tidal wave at
but on the whole the tidal wave nearer the moon has the stronger
virtue of this added impetus draws continually a little farther away

234.
--This process of
century after century, and with reference to it the moon's orbit must be
into itself, but as a spiral, like the balance spring of a watch, each
excess is, to be sure, very small, because the tides themselves are
attraction of the earth for the moon.
small force may accomplish great results, and something like 100,000,000
move the moon from close proximity with the earth out to its present

For millions of years to come, if moon and earth endure so long, the
rate, since the farther away the moon goes the smaller will be the tides
 On the other hand, when
greater and their effects more rapidly produced than at the present
was hot and plastic like Jupiter and Saturn.
the water of the sea, such as we now have, the whole substance of the
semi-fluid matter not only higher, but with greater internal friction of
checking the earth's rotation.

sea, so long as the moon causes it to flow there will be a certain
revolving wheel, slowing down its motion, and producing thus a longer
distance.
moon upon the earth.
earth's equal and contrary reaction manifests itself.

 CONSEQUENCES OF TIDAL FRICTION UPON THE MOON.
plastic the earth must have raised in it a bodily tide manifold greater
this tide has long since worn out the greater part of the moon's
always the same face toward the earth.

disturbing body, are inseparable--one requires the other; and it is
to flow, and the tidal wave takes up a permanent position, as it has in
wave there can be no friction to further reduce the rate of rotation of

means that the satellite presents always the same face toward its
revolution upon its axis, and the tide raised by the moon upon the earth
to make our day and month of equal length, and to make the earth turn
 But the moon's tidal force is
to overcome, so that its work upon the earth is not yet complete.
According to Thomson and Tait, the moon must be pushed off another
seven of our present weeks before the day and the lunar month are made
hemisphere of the earth.

 THE EARTH-MOON SYSTEM.
development of the earth and moon, it is possible to reach back by means
bodies were much nearer to each other than now, but it has not been
into two, as is supposed in the nebular theory.
their history accessible to mathematical analysis they are distinct
rotating about an axis more nearly perpendicular to the moon's orbit and
 Starting from such a condition,
the earth's rotation axis into its present oblique position, and in
respect to the ecliptic as well as the present length of day and month.

 TIDAL FRICTION UPON THE PLANETS.
planets are equally subject to influences of this kind, and there
always the same face toward their respective planets, indicating that
 We saw in Chapter
Venus and Mercury, do not always turn the same face toward the sun,
 In addition to the direct
by an appeal to tidal theory that such is probably the case, at least
result in that planet are about as great as the forces which have
Japetus.
the solar system, save possibly the newly discovered ninth satellite of
face toward its planet.

 THE SOLAR TIDE.
influence must be similar in character to that of the lunar tides,
although quantitatively these effects are small compared with those of
 They must, however, continue so long as the solar tide lasts,
 e.
may continue long after the lunar tidal influence has ceased to push
 Should this be the case, a curious inverse effect
 The day being then longer than the month, the moon
to east_, opposite to the course of the present tide, thus tending to
back toward the earth again, and ultimately to fall upon it.

Mars and its inner satellite, Phobos, whose time of orbital revolution
 It seems probable that this
and must ultimately fall into Mars.

 ROCHE'S LIMIT.
due regard must be paid to a dynamical principle of a different
 The moon can never be precipitated upon the earth entire,
of the earth's attraction for the near side of its satellite over that
 As the result of Roche's mathematical
and its satellite within which the satellite, if it turns always the
fragments.
quotient obtained by dividing the density of the planet by the density

44 r ∛q.

§ 95, _q_ = 1.
the nearest approach which the moon could make to the earth without
opposite sides.

molecular forces, the adhesion of one molecule to another, by virtue of
gravitative forces by which the molecules are attracted toward the
 Within a stone or rock of moderate
chief factor in preserving its integrity, but in a large body like the
gravitation a large one in holding the body together.
therefore, that at a proper distance these forces are capable of
such that molecular cohesion instead of gravitation is the chief agent

240.
--Saturn's rings are of peculiar interest in this
 The outer edge of the ring system lies just inside of
are composed of small fragments independent of each other.
have been the process by which the nine satellites of Saturn came into
the ring was not worked up into satellites; the forces exerted by Saturn
equally would prevent the formation of one from raw material.

matter is known to be revolving about a planet at a distance less than
remain as a permanent part of the planet's system or are only a
 The drawings of Saturn made two centuries ago agree
appear, and there is some reason to suppose that as a consequence of
so that ultimately they must be precipitated into the planet.
direct evidence of such a progress that can be drawn from present data
 On the
satellites might be formed whose tidal influence upon Saturn would
the very small inner satellites of Saturn may have been thus formed at

The inner satellite of Mars is very close to Roche's limit for that
the danger line.

 THE MOON'S DEVELOPMENT.
obtained within the last few years at Paris, have been used by the
formations, much as geologists study the surface of the earth to
 Their
and fluid body which, as it cooled and condensed, formed a solid crust
series of fractures in the crust and outbursts of liquid matter, whose
the earlier ones, connected with a general settling of the crust,
vague features of the lunar topography, such as the distribution of the
 They find also in certain markings of the surface what they
atmosphere.
moon's surface is so small that an atmosphere similar to that of the
but would be lost by the gradual escape of its molecules into the

The molecules of a gas are quite independent one of another, and are in
with its neighbors or with whatever else opposes its forward motion, and
hundreds of feet per second, although in the case of any individual
an occasional molecule having possibly a velocity several times as great
 In the upper regions of our own atmosphere, if one of
from the earth with a velocity of seven miles per second, the whole
and it would therefore, unless stopped by some collision, escape from
 But, since this velocity of seven miles
the molecules of air, it must be very seldom indeed that one is found to
this sort is insignificant.
the force of gravity is small, conditions are quite different, and in
suffice to carry a molecule away from the outer limits of its
 This velocity, only five times the average, would be
temperature was high, for then the average velocity of all the molecules
and probably would become, a serious matter, steadily depleting the
exhaustion.
atmosphere, but if so it could have been only a temporary possession,
most of the satellites of the solar system, and also, though in less

242.
--We have already considered in this chapter
as a typical case, it is commonly believed that the life history of a
which its matter is widely diffused, and presumably at a low
 Contracting in bulk under the influence of its own
falls off in later stages until the body ceases to shine and passes over
exceptional cases, such as are noted in Chapter XIII.
systematic development of this idea is due to Lockyer, who looks upon
comets--as being only collections of meteoric matter in different stages
these bodies and to determine their stage of advancement.
fundamental ideas involved in this "meteoritic hypothesis" are not
open to more question, and for the most part those astronomers who hold
a star's age or degree of advancement do not venture beyond broad

[Illustration: FIG.
--Types of stellar spectra substantially
]
243.
--Thus the types of stellar spectra shown in Fig.
151 are supposed to illustrate successive stages in the development of
 Type I corresponds to the period in which its
which the temperature has commenced to fall; and Type III to the period

While human life, or even the duration of the human race, is too short
career, an adequate picture of that development might be obtained by
following this idea, numerous subdivisions of the types of stellar
 151 have been proposed in order to represent with
part these subdivisions and their interpretation are accepted by

It is significant that there are comparatively few stars with spectra of
of a star through the last stages of its visible career occupied but a
 From the same point of view the great
duration of this stage of life.
represented by Type II, probably has a duration intermediate between the
 Since most of the variable stars, save those of the Algol class,
associated ruddy color and great atmospheric absorption of light, is a
 The Algol or eclipse
comparatively young stars, and, as we shall see a little later, the
conclusion drawn from their spectra.

stars with spectra of the second type, while the Milky Way is mainly
our particular part of the entire celestial space the stars are, as a

244.
--The double stars present special problems of
operate in them much as it does between earth and moon, tending steadily
 So, too,
 132, gravity must tend to make each
shrinkage must result in faster rotation and increased tidal friction,
small density and close proximity of those particular stars we may
career and destined with increasing age to lose its variability of
increasing distance between the components unless the orbit is turned
 Close proximity and the resulting
evidence of its youth, and since this shortness of periodic time is
class, we may set them down as being, upon the whole, stars in the early
 On the other hand, it is generally true that the
farther is the star advanced in its development.

the periodic time in the orbit is more than twice as long as the time
increase the eccentricity of the orbit, and, following this indication,
double star their orbits about the common center of gravity must grow
new index of stellar development; the more eccentric the orbit, the
 It is important to note in this
there seems to run a general rule--the larger the orbit the greater is
operates as above supposed, and which, being found to hold true,
by the theory of tidal friction.

 NEBULÆ.
to look upon nebulæ in general as material destined to be worked up into
 Their
not yet produced in them results at all comparable with what we see in
 But even among nebulæ there are to be found very
 The irregular nebula, shapeless and
star cluster, clearly differ in amount of progress toward their final
 But it is by no means sure that these several types are different
which grows into a spiral may never become a ring or planetary nebula,
 So too there is no reason to suppose that a star
relation to each other is shown in Fig.

246.
--Considering the heavenly bodies with respect to
probably find lowest down in the scale of progress the irregular nebulæ
 146.
in point of development stand the spiral, ring, and planetary nebulæ,
matter of doubt.
individual members, as well as isolated stars, are to be classified by
 151, where the order of
and beyond, to extinction of its light and the cutting off of most of
 Jupiter and Saturn are to be regarded as stars which
 The earth is further developed
the moon is to be looked upon as the most advanced heavenly body
may almost be called death--a stage typical of that toward which all the

Meteors and comets are to be regarded as fragments of celestial matter,
lines of development, but destined sooner or later, by collision with

247.
--It was considered a great achievement
the mutual attractions of sun and planets might indeed produce endless
never bring about collisions among them or greatly alter their existing
 But in the proof of this great theorem two influences were
 One of these--tidal
satellites, and the same effect must be produced upon the planets by any
 It is the
attraction, and any diminution of the planet's velocity will give this
into the sun.
into collision must have just this influence, although its effects are
which transmits radiant energy through the interstellar spaces.

pervade all space, should present absolutely no resistance to the motion
cases exceed 50,000 miles per hour.
motion, however small, we may extend to the whole visible universe the
Philosophy, "We have no data in the present state of science for
resistance of the resisting medium through which the earth and moon
such a system as that of the sun and planets, if continuing long enough
masses in space.
mass, which, although rotating for a time, must in the end come to rest
"
Compare with this the words of a great poet who in The Tempest puts into

    The solemn temples, the great globe itself,
    And, like this insubstantial pageant faded,
"
248.
--In spite of statements like these, it lies beyond the
will ever come to naught, and the outcome of present tendencies, as
influences of which we are now ignorant.
farther our speculation extends into either past or future, the more
laws are to be accepted with a corresponding reserve.
fact which stands out clear in this connection is that of _change_.
old concept of a universe created in finished form and destined so to
thought and is replaced by the idea of slow development.
which is ever becoming something else and is never finished, as shadowed

    And weave for Deity a living robe sublime.

ABIETACEÆ.

Trees or shrubs, resinous; leaves simple, mostly evergreen, relatively
stipules none; flowers catkin-like; calyx none; corolla none; ovary
its surface.

ABIETACEÆ.

 PINUS.
 TSUGA.

Buds scaly; leaves evergreen and persistent for several years (except in
linear, needle-shaped, or scale-like; sterile and fertile flowers
arranged upon a central axis, each bearing two pollen-sacs surmounted by
arranged bracts or cover-scales, each bract subtending an ovuliferous
cover-scale usually remaining small, ovuliferous scale enlarging,
bearing two ovules at its base; cones maturing (except in _Pinus_) the
seeds winged; roots mostly spreading horizontally at a short distance



THUJA.
 JUNIPERUS.

opposite, verticillate, or sometimes scattered, scale-like, often
plants; flowers minute; stamens and pistils in separate blossoms upon
pollen-sacs on the underside; scales of fertile aments few, opposite or
fleshy cone-scales; otherwise as in _Abietaceæ_.

Larix Americana, Michx.

_
TAMARACK.
 LARCH.

=Habitat and Range.
New England preferring cold swamps; sometimes far up mountain slopes.

     mountains; from the Rockies through British Columbia, northward
     beyond the Arctic circle.

extent, alone or associated with other trees, mostly black spruce;
Massachusetts,--rather common, at least northward; Rhode Island,--not
reported as far south as Danbury (Fairfield county).

     Minnesota.

=--The only New England conifer that drops its leaves in the
1-2 feet, or to a shrub; trunk 1-3 feet in diameter, straight, slender;
nearly horizontal; often ending in long spire-like shoots; branchlets
when growing in open swamps; when old extremely variable, occasionally
yellow in autumn.

=--Bark of trunk reddish or grayish brown, separating at the
season's shoots gray or light brown in autumn.

=--Buds small, globular, reddish.

short, thick dwarf branches, about an inch long, pale green,

=Inflorescence.
 Flowers lateral, solitary, erect; the
roundish, sessile; anthers yellow: fertile oblong, short-stalked; bracts

=Fruit.
to cylindrical, 1/2-3/4 of an inch long, purplish or reddish brown while
thin, obtuse to truncate; edge entire, minutely toothed or erose; seeds

=Horticultural Value.
preferring moist locations; the formal outline of the young trees
tree much more attractive than the European species common to
 Rarely for sale in nurseries, but obtainable from
 To be successfully transplanted, it must be handled when
 Propagated from seed.

=--The European species, with which the mature plant is often
     common in cultivation has long, pendulous branches.

--Larix Americana.

 Branch with sterile and fertile flowers.
  2.

 Different views of stamens.
  4.

 Fruiting branch.
  6.

 Cone-scale with seeds.
  8.

 Cross-section of leaf.

PINUS.

thin, deciduous scales, in the axils of which the secondary leaf-buds
sheath which encloses the secondary or foliage leaves, which in our



WHITE PINE.

=--In fertile soils; moist woodlands or dry uplands.

     Winnipeg.

2500 feet, forming extensive forests.

     Adirondacks and to 4300 in North Carolina; west to Minnesota and

=Habit.
forest, ordinarily from 50 to 80 feet high and 2-4 feet in diameter at
forest still remain, attaining a diameter of 3-7 feet and a height
deciduous neighbors; trunk straight, tapering very gradually; branches
five, the whorls becoming more or less indistinct in old trees;
base, clothed with soft, delicate, bluish-green foliage; roots running
extremely durable when exposed.

=--On trunks of old trees thick, shallow-channeled, broad-ridged;
shoots at first rusty-scurfy or puberulent, in late autumn becoming

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
or ovate-oblong, sharp-pointed; scales yellowish-brown.

bluish-green, needle-shaped, 3-sided, mucronate, each with a single

=Inflorescence.
 Sterile flowers at the base of the season's
stamens numerous; connectives scale-like: fertile flowers near the
pink-margined.

=--Cones, 4-6 inches long, short-stalked, narrow-cylindrical,
rather loose, scarcely thickened at the apex, not spiny; seeds winged,

=Horticultural Value.
grows well in almost any soil, but prefers a light fertile loam; in open
 Good plants, grown
plants from open ground can be moved in sods with little risk.

distinguished by variations in foliage, trailing branches, dense and

  PLATE II.

  1.

 Stamen.
  3.

 Bract and ovuliferous scale, outer side.
  5.

 Branch with cones.
  7.



PITCH PINE.

=Habitat and Range.
swamps.


Maine,--mostly in the southwestern section near the seacoast; as far
 H.
124); scarcely more than a shrub near its northern limits; New
and up the Connecticut valley to the mouth of the Passumpsic, reaching
northern Champlain valley, less frequent in the Connecticut valley
often forming large tracts of woodland, sometimes exclusively occupying

     South to Virginia and along the mountains to northern Georgia; west

=Habit.
of 1-2 feet at the ground, but not infrequently rising to 70-80 feet,
tapering rather rapidly; branches rising at a wide angle with the stem,
whorled in young trees, but gradually losing nearly every trace of
stage of growth; head variable, open, often scraggly, widest near the
terminating in rigid, spreading tufts of foliage.

--Pinus Strobus.

=--Bark of trunk in old trees thick, deeply furrowed, with broad
reddish brown scales; younger stems and branches very rough, separating

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
narrow-cylindrical or ovate, acute at the apex, resin-coated; scales

Foliage leaves in threes, 3-5 inches long, stout, stiff, dark
sessile; sheaths when young about 1/2 inch long.

=--Sterile flowers at the base of the season's shoots,
angle with and along the sides of the season's shoots, single or

=Fruit.
finally at right angles to the stem or twisted slightly downward, ovoid,
scales thickened at the apex, armed with stout, straight or recurved

=Horticultural Value.
exposed situations on highlands or along the seacoast; grows in almost
among other trees for color-effects and occasional picturesqueness of
loss of the lower limbs, and not readily transplanted; very seldom
collected plants are seldom successful.
seed.

--Pinus rigida.

 Branch with sterile flowers.
  2.

 Stamen, top view.
  4.

 Fertile flower showing bract and ovuliferous scale, outer side.
  6.

 Fruiting branch with cones one and two years old.
  8.

 Seed.
  10.


=
_Pinus divaricata.
_
SCRUB PINE.
 SPRUCE PINE.

=Habitat and Range.
slopes.

     down the Mackenzie to the Arctic circle.

 L.
on Washington county coast, Harrington, Orland, and Cape Rosier (C.

 M.
Day, E.
 Rand, _et al.
of Penobscot (Mrs.
 Hoyt); Lake Umbagog
 Brewster); New Hampshire,--around the shores of Lake Umbagog, on
 Brewster _in lit.
Welch mountains (_Bull.
 Bot.
but few trees at each station; Monkton in Addison county (R.


     West through northern New York, northern Illinois, and Michigan to

=Habit.
at the ground, but under favorable conditions, as upon the wooded points
diameter of 10-15 inches.
 In thin soils and
head scrubby, stunted, and variously distorted, resembling in shape and
 In deeper soils,
and tapering, surmounted by a stately head with long, flexible branches,
 Foliage

=Bark.
rough-scaly at the surface; branchlets dark purplish-brown, rough with
yellowish-green, turning to reddish-brown.

=--Branch-buds light brown, ovate, apex acute or

Leaves in twos, divergent from a short close sheath, about 1 inch in
stiff, curved or twisted, cross-section showing two fibrovascular
convex, inner concave or flat.

=--June.
shoots, clustered, oblong-rounded: fertile flowers along the sides or
clusters; bracts ovate, roundish, purplish.

=--Cones often numerous, 1-2 inches long, pointing in the general
whitish-yellow when young, and brown at maturity; scales when mature
general oblong-conical.
distorted, with scales at base closed, have a similar outline.

=--Hardy in New England; slow growing and hard to
collectors.

[Illustration: PLATE IV.
]
  1.

 Stamen, front view.
  3.

 Branch with fertile flowers.
  5.

 Fruiting branch.
  7.

 Variant leaves.
  10, 11.



RED PINE.

=Habitat and Range.

     Newfoundland and New Brunswick, throughout Quebec and Ontario, to

Maine,--common, plains, Brunswick (Cumberland county); woods, Bristol
Clifton (southeastern part of Penobscot county) northward just east of
eskers, but in Greenbush and Passadumkeag growing abundantly on peat
scattered; New Hampshire,--ranges with the pitch pine as far north as
several hundred acres in extent; Vermont,--less common than _P.
or _P.
stations widely separated, single trees or small groups; Rhode

     South to Pennsylvania; west through Michigan and Wisconsin to

=Habit.
with a diameter of 2-3 feet at the ground; reaching in Maine a height of
stout, horizontal or scarcely declined, forming a broad-based, rounded
irregular with age; foliage of a rich dark green, in long dense tufts at

=Bark.
which separate on the surface into thin, flat, loose scales; branchlets
orange-brown, smooth.

=--Leading branch-buds conical, about 3/4
rather loose scales.

conspicuous sheaths, about 6 inches long, dark green, needle-shaped,
inner flattish, both surfaces marked by lines of minute pale dots.

=--Sterile flowers clustered at the base of the season's
ends of the season's shoots.

=--Cones near extremity of shoot, at right angles to the stem,
opened broadly oval or roundish; scales not hooked or pointed, thickened

=Horticultural Value.
evergreen, for which there is no substitute; grows rapidly in all
disfigured by insects or disease; difficult to transplant and not common
 Propagated from seed.

--Pinus resinosa.

 Branch with sterile flowers.
  2.

 Stamen, top view.
  4.

 Bract and ovuliferous scale, outer side.
  6.

 Fruiting branch showing cones of three different seasons.
  8.

 Cross-sections of leaves.

= Pinus sylvestris, L.


Indigenous in the northern parts of Scotland and in the Alps, and from
northern Europe and Asia.

, many of these trees, probably originating from an
pasture and in the adjoining woods, a tract of about two acres in
 Most of these were cut down in 1898, but the survivors, if left
proved very favorable (C.
 Bissell _in lit.

Like _P.
 Banksiana_, it has its foliage leaves in
aside from the habit, which is quite different, it may be distinguished
inches long, while those of _P.
latter by the position of its cones, which point outward and downward at
 Banksiana_ follow the direction of the



_Picea Mariana, B.
 P.
_
BLACK SPRUCE.
 DOUBLE SPRUCE.

=Habitat and Range.
wet, rocky hillsides; not uncommon, especially northward, on dry uplands

     Labrador, Newfoundland, and Nova Scotia, westward beyond the Rocky
     in Alaska.

exclusion of other trees in the central and northern sections,
Vermont,--common in sphagnum swamps of low and high altitudes; the dwarf
 _semi-prostrata_, occurs on the summit of Mt.
(_Flora of Vermont_, 1900); Massachusetts,--frequent; Rhode Island,--not
(Litchfield county), at an elevation of 1200 feet; Newton (Fairfield
(New Haven county) a few small trees at Bethany; at Middlebury abundant
 B.

     South along the mountains to North Carolina and Tennessee; west

=Habit.
and 5-8 inches in diameter; attaining northward and westward much
2 or 3 feet high; trunk tapering very slowly, forming a narrow-based,
whorled, horizontal or more frequently declining with an upward tendency
lowest prostrate, sometimes rooting at their tips and sending up shoots;

the terminal cones each season remaining persistent at the base of the

=Bark.
scales; branchlets roughened with the footstalks of the fallen leaves;
pubescence, or nearly smooth.

=--Buds scaly, ovate, pointed, reddish-brown.
Leaves scattered, needle-shaped, dark bluish-green, the upper sides
minute bluish dots which sometimes give a glaucous effect to the lower
an inch long, straight or slightly incurved, blunt at the apex, abruptly

=Inflorescence.
spruce; sterile flowers terminal or axillary, on wood of the preceding
or near end of season's shoots, erect; scales madder-red, spirally

=Fruit.
shoots, attached to the upper side of the twig, but turning downward by
inches long; purplish or grayish brown at the end of the first season,
nearly globular when open; scales rigid, thin, reddish on the inner

=Horticultural Value.
value under cultivation; young plants seldom preserving the broad-based,
branches dying out and the whole tree becoming scraggly and unsightly.
Seldom offered by nurserymen.

--Picea nigra.

 Branch with sterile flowers.
  2.

 Stamen, side view.
  4.

 Branch with fertile flowers.
  6.

 Ovuliferous scale with ovules, inner side.
  8.

 Seed.
  10.

 Cross-sections of leaves.

=Picea rubra, Link.

 Picea nigra, var.
_
RED SPRUCE.

=--Cool, rich woods, well-drained valleys, slopes of

     Prince Edward island and Nova Scotia, along the valley of the St.
     Lawrence.

extreme north, thus forming a belt around the central area, where
Hampshire,--throughout; the most abundant conifer of upper Coos, the
parts of the Connecticut-Merrimac watershed; Vermont,--throughout; the
slopes with thin soil; Massachusetts,--common in the mountainous regions
southward; Rhode Island and Connecticut,--not reported.

     4500 feet in the Adirondacks, and 4000-5000 feet in West Virginia;

=Habit.
straight, tapering very slowly; branches longer than those of the black
sometimes resting on the ground, the upper rising toward the light,
which in old age and in bleak mountain regions becomes, by the loss of
yellowish-green.

=--Bark of trunk smoothish and mottled on young trees, at length
with shallow sinuses, separating into ashen-white plates, often
minute, erect, pale rusty pubescence.

=--Buds scaly, conical, brownish, 1/3 inch long.
Leaves solitary, at first closely appressed around the young shoots,
upward, giving a brush-like appearance to the twig, 1/2-3/4 inch long,
 nigra_),
less pointed, often mucronate; base blunt; sessile on persistent

=Inflorescence.
 Sterile flowers terminal or axillary on wood of
fertile flowers lateral along previous season's shoots, erect; scales
slightly erose.

=--Cones; single or clustered, lateral along the previous
on short stalks, falling the first autumn but sometimes persistent a
 nigra_),
or slightly irregular.

=--Hardy throughout New England; adapts itself to a
 Its narrow-based
contrast with most other evergreens.
subject to the loss of its lower branches and to disfigurement by
 Seldom offered in nurseries.

--Picea rubra.

 Branch with sterile flowers.
  2.

 Stamen, side view.
  4.

 Cover-scale and ovuliferous scale, outer side.
  6.

 Fruiting branch with cones of two seasons.
  8.

 Leaf.
  10.


=
_Picea Canadensis, B.
 P.

 CAT SPRUCE.
[2] LABRADOR SPRUCE.

=--Low, damp, but not wet woods; dry, sandy soils,

[Footnote 1, 2: So called from the peculiarly unpleasant odor of the
distinguishes it from the _P.
 rubra_.

     Ontario to Manitoba and British Columbia, northward beyond all

Maine,--frequent in sandy soils, often more common than _P.
far south as the shores of Casco bay; New Hampshire,--abundant around
Fifteen-Mile falls; Vermont,--restricted mainly to the northern
the mountainous regions of Berkshire county; a few trees in Hancock (A.
K.
 E.
(Mrs.
 Terry), probably about the southern limit of the species;

     West through the northern sections of the northern tier of states

=Habit.
at the ground, the trunk tapering slowly, throwing out numerous
branches, forming a symmetrical, rather broad conical head, with
planes; gum bitter.

=--Bark of trunk pale reddish-brown or light gray, on very old
smaller and more closely appressed; young trees and small branches much
fir balsam; branchlets glabrous; shoots from which the leaves have
fawn-color at first, turning darker the second season; bark of the tree

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
long, light brown.
 rubra_ or
appear on the upper side, giving a brush-like appearance to the twig,
needle-shaped, 4-angled, slightly curved, bluntish or sharp-pointed,
malodorous, especially when bruised.

=--April to May.
wood of the preceding season; distinctly stalked; cylindrical, 1/2 an
shoots; scales pale red or green, spirally imbricated, broader than
ovules.

=--Cones short-stalked, at or near ends of branchlets, light
inches long, when closed cylindrical, tapering towards the apex,
winter; scales broad, thin, smooth; margin rounded, sometimes

=Horticultural Value.
finest development, the best of our New England spruces for ornamental
or well-drained soils, in open sun or shade, and in exposed situations.
The foliage is sometimes infested by the red spider.
seed.

--Picea alba.

 Branch with sterile flowers.
  2.

 Stamen, side view.
  4.

 Cover-scale and ovuliferous scale, outer side.
  6.

 Fruiting branch.
  8.

 Seed with ovuliferous scale.
  10.

 Cross-sections of leaves.

=Tsuga Canadensis, Carr.


=Habitat and Range.
ravines, mountain slopes.


Maine,--abundant, generally distributed in the southern and central
Aroostook county and the northern Penobscot region; New
mountains, disappearing in upper Coos county; Vermont,--common,
Connecticut,--common.

     ascending to an altitude of 2000 feet in the Adirondacks; west to

=Habit.
diameter, straight, tapering very slowly; branches going out at right
declined or drooping; head spreading, somewhat irregular, widest at the
foliage dense, extremely delicate, dark lustrous green above and silver

=Bark.
shallow-furrowed in old trees; young trunks and branches of large trees
reddish-brown, minutely pubescent.

=--Winter buds minute, red brown.
spirally arranged but brought by the twisting of the leafstalk into two
yellow green when young, becoming at maturity dark shining green on the
smooth, occasionally minutely toothed, especially in the upper half;
resting on a slightly projecting leaf-cushion.

=--Sterile flowers from the axils of the preceding year's
fertile catkins at ends of preceding year's branchlets, scales crimson.

=--Cones, on stout footstalks at ends of branchlets, pointing
long, ovate-elliptical, pointed; scales rounded at the edge, entire or

=Horticultural Value.
anywhere, but prefers a good, light, loamy or gravelly soil on moist
places, and a favorite hedge plant; not affected by rust or insect
 About
densely globular, or weeping habit, are offered for sale in nurseries.

--Tsuga Canadensis.

 Branch with flower-buds.
  2.

 Sterile flowers.
  4.

 Branch with fertile flowers.
  6.

 Fruiting branch.
  8.

 Leaf.
  10.


=
FIR BALSAM.
 FIR.

=--Rich, damp, cool woods, deep swamps, mountain

     Labrador, Newfoundland, and Nova Scotia, northwest to the Great

Maine,--very generally distributed, ordinarily associated with white
altitude of 4500 feet upon Katahdin; New Hampshire,--common in upper
area; in the southern part of the state, in the extensive swamps
prevailing timber; Vermont,--common; not rare on mountain slopes and
northwestern and central portions of the state, ranging above the red
swamps in the southern and eastern sections, where it has probably been

     South to Pennsylvania and along high mountains to Virginia; west to

=Habit.
England spruces, with a height of 25-60 feet, and a diameter of 1-2 feet
trees usually in whorls; branchlets mostly opposite.
from the trunk at an angle varying to a marked degree even in trees of
base, horizontal midway, ascending near the top; in others horizontal or
Norway spruce; all these forms growing apparently under precisely the
foliage dark bright green; cones erect and conspicuous.

=--Bark of trunk in old trees a variegated ashen gray, appearing
edge scarcely revolute, giving a ripply aspect; branches and young trees
which the leaves have fallen marked with nearly circular leaf-scars;
with numerous blisters, containing the Canada balsam of commerce.

=--Buds small, roundish, resinous, grouped on
 Leaves scattered, spirally arranged in rows, at
inch long, dark glossy green on the upper surface, beneath silvery
narrowly linear; apex blunt, in young trees and upon vigorous shoots,
with a sharp, rigid point; sessile; aromatic.

=--Early spring.
preceding season; sterile flowers oblong-cylindrical, 1/4 inch in
the twig, erect, cylindrical; cover-scales broad, much larger than the

=Fruit.
so in all stages of growth, purplish when young, 3-5 inches long, 1 inch
ovuliferous scales, thin, obovate, serrulate, bristle-pointed;
or entire; both kinds of scales falling from the axis at maturity; seeds

=Horticultural Value.
northern sections; grows rapidly in open or shaded situations,
suitable for immediate effects in forest plantations, but not desirable
early period.
price.

[Illustration: PLATE X.
]
  1.

 Branch with sterile flowers.
  3.

 Cover-scale and ovuliferous scale with ovules, inner side.
  5.

 Ovuliferous scales with ovules at maturity, inner side.
  7.

 Leaves.
  10-11.


=
ARBOR-VITÆ.
 CEDAR.

=--Low, swampy lands, rocky borders of rivers and

     Southern Labrador to Nova Scotia; west to Manitoba.

portions, forming extensive areas known as "cedar swamps"; sometimes
Hampshire,--mostly confined to the upper part of Coos county,
isolated localities south of the White mountains; Vermont,--common in
occasional in the northern sections of the Connecticut river valley;
 N.

     South along the mountains to North Carolina and East Tennessee;

=Habit.
in northern Maine occasionally 60-70 feet in height, with a diameter of
rapidly, often divided, inclined or twisted, ramifying for the most part
trunk; branches irregularly disposed and nearly horizontal, the lower
fan-shaped planes at different angles; foliage bright, often

=Bark.
and flat ridges, often conspicuously spirally twisted, shreddy at the
and shreddy; branchlets ultimately smooth, shining, reddish-brown,

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
 Leaves in opposite
covering it, keeled in the side pairs and flat in the others,
apex, glandular upon the back, exhaling when bruised a strong aromatic

=Inflorescence.
 Flowers terminal, dark reddish-brown;
plants; anthers opposite; filaments short; ovuliferous scales opposite,

=Fruit.
about 1/2 inch long, reddish-brown, loose-scaled, opening to the base at
not shield-shaped, not pointed; margin entire or nearly so; seeds winged

=Horticultural Value.
and exposures, but prefers moist locations; grows slowly.
have a narrowly conical outline, which spreads out at the base with age;
hedges or narrow evergreen screens; little affected by insects; often
transplanted readily, and can be obtained in any quantity from
 The horticultural forms in cultivation range
conical forms, to tall, narrow, pyramidal varieties.
foliage tinged bright yellow, cream, or white; others have variegated
 The bright summer foliage
 It is propagated from the seed and

[Illustration: PLATE XI.
]
  1.

 Branch.
  3.

 Stamen.
  5.

 Scale with ovules.

=Cupressus thyoides, L.

 Chamæcyparis thyoides, B.
 P.

 CEDAR.

=--In deep swamps and marshes, which it often fills

     Cape Breton island and near Halifax, Nova Scotia, perhaps

Maine,--reported from the southern part of York county; New
station known; Massachusetts,--occasional in central and eastern
Connecticut,--occasional in peat swamps.


=Habit.
reaching in the southern states an altitude of 90 and a diameter of 4
slender branches, forming a narrow, conical head often of great elegance
in planes disposed at different angles; wood permanently aromatic.

=--Bark of trunk thick, reddish, fibrous, shreddy, separating into
reddish-brown; fine scaled; branches after fall of leaves, in the third
greenish.

=--Leaf-buds naked, minute.
opposite, 4-ranked, adherent to the branchlet and completely covering
green, pointed at apex or triangular awl-shaped, mostly with a minute

=Inflorescence.
 Flowers terminal, sterile and fertile, usually
branchlets: sterile, globular or oblong, anthers opposite, filaments
slightly spreading at top, dark reddish-brown.

=--Cones, variously placed, 1/2 inch in diameter, roundish,
shield-shaped, woody; seeds several under each scale, winged.

=--Hardy throughout New England, growing best in
 Young trees are graceful and attractive, but soon
planting for covering low and boggy places where other trees do not
 Seldom for sale in nurseries, but easily procured from
 Several unimportant horticultural forms are grown.

--Cupressus thyoides.

 Branch with flowers.
  2.

 Stamen, back view.
  4.

 Fertile flower.
  6.

 Fruiting-branch.
  8.

 Branch.

=Juniperus Virginiana, L.

 CEDAR.

=Habitat and Range.
borders of lakes and streams, sterile plains, peaty swamps.


Maine,--rare, though it extends northward to the middle Kennebec valley,
southeast part of the state; sparingly in the Connecticut valley as far
the White mountain region; Vermont,--not abundant; occurs here and there
lower Connecticut valleys; Massachusetts,--west and center occasional,

     South to Florida; west to Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas, and Indian

=Habit.
8-20 inches, attaining much greater dimensions southward; extremely
upper ascending; head when young very regular, narrow-based, close and
roundish or flattened.
seacoast, the trunk sometimes rises a foot or two and then develops
 Under such
wide-spreading branches and a very dense dome; spray close, foliage a
aromatic.

=--Bark of trunk light reddish-brown, fibrous, shredding off, now
shoots green.

=--Leaf-buds naked, minute.
brownish-red, of two kinds:
1.
4-ranked, ovate, acute, sometimes bristle-tipped, more or less convex,

2.
sharp-pointed, spreading.
sometimes comprising all the foliage, but is often found on trees of all

=Inflorescence.
 Flowers terminating short branches, sterile
anthers in opposite pairs; ovuliferous scales in opposite pairs,

=Fruit.
extremities of which are often visible, roundish, the size of a small

=Horticultural Value.
slopes and a loamy soil, but grows well in poor, thin soils and upon
have a very formal, symmetrical outline; old trees often become
usually obtainable in nurseries and from collectors, but must frequently
 If a ball of earth can be
successfully.
weeping or distorted habit, and by variegated bluish or yellowish
 The type is usually
grafting.

--Juniperus Virginiana.

 Branch with sterile and fertile flowers.
  2.

 Stamen with pollen-sacs.
  4.

 Fruiting branch.
  6.

 Branch with needle-shaped leaves.


SALICACEÆ.


either minute and soon falling or leafy and persistent; inflorescence
leaves, in nearly erect, spreading or drooping catkins, sterile and
or corolla; stamens one to many; style short or none; stigmas 2, entire



Inflorescence usually appearing before the leaves; flowers with lacerate
stamens usually many, filaments distinct; stigmas mostly divided,



Inflorescence appearing with or before the leaves; flowers with entire


=
POPLAR.

=Habitat and Range.
though more usual in dry uplands; sometimes springing up in great

     Newfoundland, Labrador, and Nova Scotia to the Hudson bay region

New England,--common, reaching in the White mountain region an altitude

     South to New Jersey, along the mountains in Pennsylvania and
     slopes of the Rocky mountains, along which it extends to Mexico and

=Habit.
50-60 feet high; trunk 8-15 inches in diameter, tapering, surmounted by
consisting of short, stout, leafy rounded shoots set at a wide angle;
and branches, the deep red of the sterile catkins in early spring, and

=Bark.
becoming ash-gray and roughish in old trees; season's shoots dark

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
lustrous, usually smooth, ovate, acute, often slightly incurved at apex,
 Leaves 1-2-1/2 inches long, breadth usually
young, dark dull green above when mature, lighter beneath, glabrous on
finely serrate or wavy-edged, with incurved, glandular-tipped teeth,
slightly heart-shaped, 3-nerved; leafstalk slender, strongly flattened
breath of air; stipules lanceolate, silky, soon falling.

=--April to May.
at first about the same length, gradually elongating; bracts cut into
anthers red: ovary short-stalked; stigmas two, 2-lobed, red.

=--June.
white-hairy.

=--Hardy throughout New England in the most exposed
rapidly; foliage and spray thin; generally short-lived; often used as a
or two horticultural forms are occasionally offered.
seed or cuttings.

--Populus tremuloides.

 Branch with sterile catkins.
  2.

 Branch with fertile catkins.
  4.

 Fruiting branch.
  6.

 Variant leaves.

=Populus grandidentata, Michx.

 LARGE-TOOTHED ASPEN.

=--In rich or poor soils; woods, hillsides, borders

     Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, southern Quebec, and Ontario.


     South to Pennsylvania and Delaware, along the mountains to

=Habit.
diameter at the ground, sometimes attaining much greater dimensions;
distant, small and crooked; branchlets round; spray sparse, consisting
constant motion of foliage, and general habit, closely resembling _P.
tremuloides.

=--Bark of trunk on old trees dark grayish-brown or blackish,
small, thickish scales; trunk of young trees soft greenish-gray;
greenish-gray, roughened with leaf-scars; season's twigs in fall dark

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
chestnut, more or less pubescent, dusty-looking, ovate, acute.
3-5 inches long, two-thirds as wide, densely white-tomentose when
lighter beneath, bright yellow in autumn; outline roundish-ovate,
shallow curves; apex acute; base truncate or slightly heart-shaped;
blade; stipules thread-like, soon falling.

=--March to April.
fertile at first about the same length, but gradually elongating;
10; anthers red: ovaries short-stalked; stigmas two, 2-lobed, red.

=--Fruiting catkins at length 3-6 inches long; capsule conical,

=Horticultural Value.
anywhere, but prefers moist, rich loam; grows rapidly and is safely
short-lived; seldom offered by nurserymen, but readily procured from
 Useful to grow for temporary
kinds are well established.

=Note.
 tremuloides_ and _P.
grandidentata_.
the color of the unfolding leaves.

 grandidentata_
 The leaves of _P.
larger and more coarsely toothed, and the main branches go off usually
 The buds of _P.
dusty-looking, dull; of _P.
polished with a resinous lustre.

--Populus grandidentata.

 Branch with sterile catkins.
  2.
  3.

 Branch with fertile catkins.
  5.

 Fertile flower, front view.
  7.

 Fruit.
  9.


=
POPLAR.
 COTTONWOOD.

=--In or along swamps occasionally or often

Connecticut,--frequent in the southern sections; Bozrah (J.
 Bishop);
 E.
_), New
 A.

     Following the eastern coast in wide belts from New York (Staten
     to western Louisiana, and northward along the Mississippi and Ohio

=Habit.
feet, reaching farther south a maximum of 90 feet; trunk 9-18 inches in
or narrow-oblong head; branches irregular, short, rising, except the
degree of pubescence, and glossiness, becoming rough after the first

=Bark.
loosely attached narrow plates in old trees; in young trees light

=Winter Buds and Leaves.

young, at length dark green on the upper side, lighter beneath and
heart-shaped, lobes often overlapping; apex obtuse; leafstalk long,

=Inflorescence.
 Sterile catkins when expanded 3-4 inches
stamens numerous, anthers oblong, dark red: fertile catkins spreading,
ovary short-stalked; styles 2-3, united at the base; stigmas 2-3,

=Fruit.
capsules usually erect, ovoid, acute, shorter than or equaling the

=Horticultural Value.
collectors; its usefulness in landscape gardening not definitely known.

--Populus heterophylla.

 Winter buds.
  2.

 Sterile flower.
  4.

 Branch with fertile catkin.
  6.

 Fruiting branch with mature leaves.

=Populus deltoides, Marsh.

_
COTTONWOOD.

=Habitat and Range.
lakes, not uncommon in drier locations.


Maine,--not reported; New Hampshire,--restricted to the immediate
of Westmoreland; Vermont,--western sections, abundant along the shores
 W.
Eggleston); in the Connecticut valley as far north as Brattleboro
its tributaries; Rhode Island,--occasional; Connecticut,--occasional
rivers.


=Habit.
diameter, light gray, straight or sometimes slightly inclined, of nearly
broad-spreading, open, symmetrical head, the lower branches massive,
extremities, the upper coarse and spreading, rising at a sharper angle;
sterile trees gorgeous in spring with dark red pendent catkins.

=--In old trees thick, ash-gray, separated into deep, straight
smooth; season's shoots greenish, marked with pale longitudinal lines.

=--Buds large, conical, smooth, shining.
3-6 inches long, scarcely less in width, variable in color and shape,
both sides; outline broadly ovate, irregularly crenate-toothed; apex
sometimes acute; stems long, slender, somewhat flattened at right angles

=Inflorescence.
 In solitary, densely flowered catkins;
stamens very numerous; anthers longer than the filaments, dark red:
4, nearly sessile, spreading.

=--Capsules ovate, rough, short-stalked; seeds densely cottony.

=--Hardy in southern-central New England; grows
 Where
excellently and frequently makes very fine large individual trees, but
 Usually


--Populus deltoides.

 Winter buds.
  2.

 Sterile flower, back view.
  4.

 Scale of sterile flower.
  6.

 Fruiting catkin.
  8.

 Variant leaf.

=Populus balsamifera, L.

 POPLAR.

=Habitat and Range.
swamps, woods.

     coast of Alaska and along the Mackenzie river to the Arctic circle.

the river, becoming more plentiful northward; Vermont,--frequent;
along the Housatonic river at New Milford for five or six miles, perhaps
 K.

     West through northern New York, Michigan, Minnesota, Dakota (Black

=Habit.
diameter, straight; branches horizontal or nearly so, slender for size
mostly terete; foliage thin.

=--In old trees dark gray or ash-gray, firm-ridged, in young trees
sparsely orange-dotted.

=--Buds 3/4 inch long, appressed or slightly
opening.
young, when mature bright green, whitish below; outline ovate-lanceolate
apex; base obtuse to rounded, sometimes truncate or heart-shaped;
soon falling.
 _intermedia_ are obovate to oval; those
 _latifolia_ closely approach the leaves of _P.

=Inflorescence.
 Sterile 3-4 inches long, fertile at first about
irregularly and rather narrowly cut-toothed, each bract subtending a
stigmas two, 2-lobed, large, wavy-margined.

=--Fruiting catkins drooping, 4-6 inches long: capsules ovoid,

=Horticultural Value.
excepting very wet soils, in full sun or light shade, and in exposed
kill the branches and make the head unsightly; also spreads from the
useful in the formation of shelter-belts; readily transplanted but not
 Propagated from cuttings.

--Populus balsamifera.

 Branch with sterile flowers.
  2.

 Sterile flower, side view.
  4.

 Branch with fertile catkins.
  6.

 Fruiting catkins, mature.
  8.


=
_Populus balsamifera_, var.
_
BALM OF GILEAD.

=--In a great variety of soils; usually in cultivated
wild state.
agreed upon.
 H.
Michigan, and northern collectors find both sexes in New Hampshire and
rarely if ever seen, and the pistillate flowers seldom if ever mature
 The evidence seems to indicate a narrow belt extending
intermediate southern sections of the Province of Ontario as the home of

     Nova Scotia and New Brunswick,--occasional; Ontario,--frequent.


     South to New Jersey; west to Michigan and Minnesota.

=--A medium-sized tree, 40-60 feet high; trunk 1-3 feet in
bushy branchlets; head very variable in shape and size; solitary in open
trees more often rather small; loosely and irregularly branched, with
and abundant_; all parts characterized by a strong and peculiar resinous
 A single tree multiplying by suckers often becomes parent of
ages and sizes.

=--Bark of trunk and lower portions of large branches dark gray,
upon smaller branches smooth, soft grayish-green, often flanged by
triangular leaf-scars; season's shoots often flanged, shining reddish or

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
along the stalk, conical or somewhat angled, narrow, often falcate,
powerful odor when the scales expand, terminal about 3/4 inch long.
Leaves 4-6 inches long and nearly as wide, yellowish-green at first,
of a _minute pubescence along the veins_, dull light green beneath,
minute stiff, whitish hairs; base heart-shaped; apex short-pointed;
flattened at right angles to the blade; stipules short, ovate, acute,

=Inflorescence.
 balsamifera_.

=--Similar to that of _P.

=Horticultural Value.
foliage and grows rapidly in all soils and situations, but the branches
objectionable in ornamental ground; occasionally offered by nurserymen
 Propagated from cuttings.

--Populus candicans.

 Winter bud.
  2.

 Fertile flower.
  4.


=
ABELE.
 SILVER-LEAF POPLAR.

=--Widely distributed in the Old World, extending in Europe from
eastward in Asia to the northwestern Himalayas.
by the early settlers and soon established in the colonial towns, as in
 Planted

     New Brunswick and Nova Scotia,--occasional.


     Southward to Virginia.

=--A handsome tree, resembling _P.
other American poplar, but of far nobler proportions; 40-75 feet high
head large, spreading; round-topped, in spring enveloped in a dazzling
conspicuously contrasting surfaces of dark green and silvery white.

=--Light gray, smooth upon young trees, in old trees furrowed upon

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
 Leaves 1-4 inches
above and white-tomentose to glabrous beneath; outline ovate or deltoid,
heart-shaped or truncate; apex acute to obtuse; leafstalk long, slender,

=Inflorescence and Fruit.
 Sterile catkins 2-4 inches
purple: capsules 1/4 inch long, narrow-ovoid; seeds hairy.

=--Hardy.
exposed situations; grows rapidly in good soils; of distinctive value in
lawns of limited area on account of its habit of throwing out numerous
 The sides of
for a considerable distance by the thrifty shoots from underground.

=Salix discolor.
=
PUSSY WILLOW.

=Habitat and Range.
hillsides.


Maine,--abundant; common throughout the other New England states.


=Habit.
assuming a tree-like habit, with a height of 15-20 feet and trunk
 H.
high (F.
 Batchelder); branches few, stout, ascending, forming a very

=Bark.
green, orange-dotted.

=--Buds ovate-conical; apex obtuse to acute.
Leaves simple, alternate, 2-4 inches long, smooth and bright green
ovate-lanceolate to narrowly oblong-oval, crenulate-serrate to entire;
entire.

=--March to April.
catkins, sterile and fertile on separate plants, occasionally both kinds
oblong-cylindrical, silky; calyx none; petals none; bracts entire,
silky hairs; stamens 2; filaments distinct: fertile catkins spreading;

=Fruit.
tomentose, stem two-thirds the length of the scale: seeds numerous.

=--Picturesque in blossom and fruit; its value
ability to withstand considerable shade.
easily propagated from cuttings.

--Salix discolor.

 Leaf-buds.
  2.

 Sterile flower.
  4.

 Fertile flower.
  6.

 Mature leaves.

=Salix nigra, Marsh.


=--In low grounds, along streams or ponds, river

     New Brunswick to western Ontario.


     South to Florida; west to Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas, Indian
     Mexico.

=--A large shrub or small tree, 25-40 feet high and 10-15 inches
valleys and the valley of the lower Colorado; trunk short, surmounted by
slender branchlets, and twigs brittle towards their base.

 nigra_, var.
, covers about the same range as the

=Bark.
dark-colored or nearly black, deeply and irregularly ridged, separated
twigs bronze olive.

=--Buds narrowly conical, acute.
alternate, appearing much later than those of _S.
long, somewhat pubescent on both sides when young, when mature green and
outline narrowly lanceolate, finely serrate; apex acute or acuminate,
short, usually pubescent; stipules large and persistent, or small and

=Inflorescence.
 Appearing with the leaves from the axils
different trees, stalked,--sterile spreading, narrowly cylindrical;
ciliate; stamens about 5: fertile catkins spreading; calyx none; corolla
short-stalked, with two small glands at its base, ovate-conical,

=Fruit.
short-stemmed, minutely granular; style very short: seeds numerous.

=--Hardy in New England; grows rapidly in all
insects; occasionally offered in nurseries; transplanted readily;

[Illustration: PLATE XXI.
]
  1.

 Branch with sterile catkins.
  3.

 Sterile flower, front view.
  5.

 Fertile flower, side view.
  7.

 Fruiting branch.
  9.


=
The _fragilis_ and _alba_ group of genus _Salix_ gives rise to puzzling
 Pure _fragilis_ and pure
rather common, and _alba_ rather rare within the limits of the United
 Each species has varieties; the two species hybridize with each
forms.
species and varieties, about most of which so little is known that any
misleading.
the limits within which any one of the various forms of that species


=
CRACK WILLOW.

=Habitat and Range.
 Indigenous in
introduced into America probably from England for use in basket-making,
extensively cultivated, and often spontaneous in wet places and along

=Habit.
feet; head open, wide-spreading; branches except the lowest rising at a
very brittle at the base.
estate, Humphreys Street, Dorchester, Mass.
about 60 feet high, 28 feet 2 inches in girth five feet from the ground,
Massachusetts_, p.

=Bark.
very rough, irregularly ridged, sometimes cleaving off in large plates.

=--Buds about 1/3 inch long, reddish-brown,
 Leaves simple, alternate, 2-6 inches long, smooth, dark
when young; outline lanceolate, glandular-serrate; apex long-acuminate;
top; stipules half-cordate when present, soon falling.

=--April to May.
spreading, stalked,--sterile 1-2 inches long; stamens 2-4, usually 2;
slender; stigma nearly sessile; capsule long-conical, smooth,

=Horticultural Value.
streams, but adapts itself readily to all rich, damp soils.
ornamental tree when planted where its roots can find water, and its
 Readily propagated from slips.

SALIX ALBA, L.


=Habitat and Range.
 Probably
northwestern India.
spontaneous over large areas.


New England,--sparingly throughout.


=Habit.
and 2-7 feet in diameter; head large, not as broad-spreading as that of
 fragilis_; branches numerous, mostly ascending.

=--Bark of trunk in old trees gray and coarsely ridged, in young

=Leaves.
both sides when young, when old still retaining more or less pubescence,
elliptic-lanceolate, glandular-serrate, tapering to a long pointed apex
ovate-lanceolate, soon falling.

=--Var.
, by far the most common form of this
 Var.
Koch.
twigs _olive_.

=--April to May.
slender, erect, stalked; scales linear; stamens 2; filaments distinct,
glabrous, sessile or nearly so.

=--Hardy throughout New England; grows best in
banks of streams.



 WALNUT FAMILY.

=Juglans cinerea, L.

 OILNUT.

=Habitat and Range.
moist hillsides, high up on mountain slopes.


Maine,--common, often abundant; New Hampshire,--throughout the
base of the White mountains; Vermont,--frequent; Massachusetts,--common
Connecticut,--common.

     to Minnesota, Kansas, and Arkansas.

=--Usually a medium-sized tree, 20-45 feet in height, with a
under favorable conditions much greater dimensions.
feet from the ground and throws out long, rather stout, and nearly
of the tree a very wide-spreading head, with a stout and stiffish spray.
At its best the butternut is a picturesque and even beautiful tree.

=--Bark of trunk dark gray, rough, narrow-ridged and wide-furrowed
with gray dots and prominent leaf-scars; season's shoots greenish-gray,
 The bruised bark of the nut

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
2-4 buds often superposed, the uppermost largest and far above the
 Leaves pinnately compound, alternate, 1-1-1/2 feet long,
base; stipules none; leaflets 9-17, 2-4 inches long, about half as wide,
green, lighter beneath, yellow in autumn; outline oblong-lanceolate,
to rounded, somewhat inequilateral, sessile, except the terminal

=Inflorescence.
 Appearing while the leaves are unfolding, sterile
lateral buds of the preceding season, in single, unbranched, stout,
mostly 6-lobed, borne on an oblong scale; corolla none; stamens 8-12,
common peduncle from the season's shoots; calyx hairy, 4-lobed, with 4
feathery, diverging, rose red.

=--Ripening in October, one or several from the same footstalk,
dark brown when dry: shells sculptured, rough: kernel edible, sweet but

=Horticultural Value.
well-drained soil, but prefers a deep, rich loam; seldom reaches its
 Trees of the same age are apt to vary in vigor
10 inches in diameter are seldom seen; the foliage is thin, appears late
occasionally offered in nurseries, collected plants seldom successful.
Best grown from seed planted where the tree is to stand, as is evident

[Illustration: PLATE XXII.
]
  1.

 Flowering branch.
  3.

 Fertile flower.
  5.

 Leaf.

=Juglans nigra, L.


=Habitat and Range.

Maine, New Hampshire, and Vermont,--not reported native;
western part of the Connecticut valley to the New York line; Rhode
Connecticut,--frequent westward, Darien (Fairfield county); Plainville
 N.
_, 1896); in the central and

     South to Florida; west to Minnesota, Kansas, Arkansas, and Texas.

=--A large tree, 50-75 feet high, with a diameter above the swell
feet and a diameter of 6-8 feet; trunk straight, slowly tapering,
broad angle, forming an open, spacious, noble head.

=--Bark of trunk in old trees thick, blackish, and deeply
smooth; season's twigs downy.

=--Buds small, ovate or rounded, obtuse, more or
 Leaves pinnately compound, alternate; rachis
stipules none; leaflets 13-21 (the odd leaflet at the apex often
dark green and smooth above, lighter and slightly glandular-pubescent
taper-pointed; base oblique, usually rounded or heart-shaped; stemless
 Aromatic when

=Inflorescence.
 Appearing while the leaves are unfolding, sterile
the ends of the preceding year's branches, in single, unbranched,
of 6 rounded lobes, stamens numerous, filaments very short, anthers
solitary or several on a common peduncle; calyx 4-toothed, with 4 small

=Fruit.
two or more together; round, smooth, or somewhat roughish with uneven
into sections: shell irregularly furrowed: kernel edible.

=--Hardy in central and southern New England; grows
handsome tree.
rather poorly, and collected plants are of little value.
appear late and drop early, and the fruit is often abundant.
disadvantages make it objectionable in many cases.

[Illustration: PLATE XXIII.
]
  1.

 Flowering branch.
  3.

 Sterile flower, back view.
  5.

 Fruiting branch.

=Carya alba, Nutt.

_
SHAGBARK.
 WALNUT.

=--In various soils and situations, fertile slopes,

     Valley of the St.

Maine,--along or near the coast as far north as Harpswell (Cumberland
Vermont,--occasional along the Connecticut to Windsor, rather common in
mountains; Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut,--common.

     Minnesota, Kansas, Indian territory, and Texas.

=--The tallest of the hickories and proportionally the most
diameter; rising to a great height in the Ohio and Indiana river
 The trunk, shaggy in old trees, rises with nearly uniform
of unequal length and irregularly disposed, forming an oblong or rounded

=Bark.
smoothish to seamy; in old trees, extremely characteristic, usually
free at one or both ends, easily detachable; branchlets smooth and gray,
numerous-dotted.

=--Buds tomentose, ovate to oblong, terminal
purplish-fringed, downy, enlarging to 5-6 inches in length as the leaves
 Leaves pinnately compound, alternate, 12-20 inches long; petiole
usually 5, sometimes 3 or 7, 3-7 inches long, dark green above,
obovate to lanceolate, the two lower much smaller, oblong to
rounded or acute, mostly inequilateral; nearly sessile save the odd

=Inflorescence.
 Sterile and fertile flowers on the same tree,
season's shoots, in slender, green, pendulous catkins, 4-6 inches long,
flower-scales 3-parted, the middle lobe much longer than the other two,
mostly in fours, anthers yellow, bearded at the tip: fertile flowers
calyx 4-toothed, hairy, adherent to ovary; corolla none; stigmas 2,

=Fruit.
 Spherical, 3-6 inches in circumference: husks rather
sections: nut variable in size, subglobose, white, usually 4-angled:

=Horticultural Value.
well-drained, loamy soil; when well established makes a moderately rapid
plants seldom survive; a fine tree for landscape gardening, but its nuts
 Propagated from a seed.
thin-shelled variety is in cultivation.

--Carya alba.

 Winter buds.
  2.

 Sterile flower, front view.
  4.

 Fertile flower.
  6.


=
_Hicoria alba, Britton.

 WHITE-HEART HICKORY.

Habitat and Range.
slopes.


Maine and Vermont,--not reported; New Hampshire,--sparingly along the
Connecticut,--common.

    Nebraska, Missouri, Indian territory, and Texas.

=--A tall and rather slender tree, 50-70 feet high, with a
greater dimensions south and west; trunk erect, not shaggy, separating
sharp angle, forming a handsome, wide-spreading, pyramidal head.

=--Bark of trunk dark gray, thick, hard, close, and rough,
leaf-scars prominent; season's shoots stout, brown, downy or dusty

=Winter Buds and Leaves.

downy, swollen at the base; stipules none; leaflets 7-9, opposite,
at least when young, turning to a clear yellow or russet brown in
slightly serrate or entire, pointed, base acute to rounded, nearly
 Aromatic when bruised.

=--May.
appearing when the leaves are fully grown,--sterile at the base of the
usually in threes, branching umbel-like from a common peduncle; scales
the tip: fertile flowers on peduncles at the end of the season's shoots;

=Fruit.
 Generally sessile on terminal peduncles, single or in
that of the pignut, oblong-globose to globose: husk hard and thick,
globular, 4-ridged near the top, thick-shelled: kernel usually small,
 The superior size of the fruit and the smallness of the
"
=Horticultural Value.
well-drained soil, but grows well in rocky, ledgy, exposed
 Young trees have
they have been frequently transplanted in nurseries, from which,
 Propagated from seed.

--Carya tomentosa.

 Winter buds.
  2.

 Sterile flower, front view.
  4.

 Sterile flower, top view.
  6.

 Fruiting branch.

=Carya porcina, Nutt.


PIGNUT.

=Habitat and Range.

    Niagara peninsula and along Lake Erie.

Hampshire,--common toward the coast and along the lower Merrimac valley;
Bellows Falls; Vermont,--Marsh Hill, Ferrisburgh (Brainerd); W.
Castleton and Pownal (Eggleston); Massachusetts,--common eastward; along
common than the shagbark; Rhode Island and Connecticut,--common.

    Indian territory, and Texas.

=--A stately tree, 50-65 feet high, reaching in the Ohio basin a
surmounted by a large, oblong, open, rounded, or pyramidal head, often

=Bark.
roughened, in old trees smooth or broken into rough and occasionally
shoots smooth or nearly so, purplish changing to gray, with numerous

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
 tomentosa_,
the inner reddish, lengthening to 1 or 2 inches, not dropping till after
 Leaves pinnately compound, alternate, 10-18
opposite, 2-5 inches long, yellowish-green above, paler beneath, turning
upper obovate, the two lower oblong-lanceolate, all taper-pointed; base

=Inflorescence.
 Sterile and fertile flowers on the same tree,
season's shoots, in pendulous, downy, slender catkins, 3-5 inches long,
3-lobed, nearly glabrous, lobes of nearly equal length, pointed, the
hairs: fertile flowers at the ends of the season's shoots; calyx

=Fruit.
 Single or in pairs, sessile on a short, terminal
obovate, usually about 1-1/2 inches in diameter: husk thin, green
sometimes nearly to the base: nut rather thick-shelled, not ridged, not

=Horticultural Value.
well-drained soils, but prefers a deep, rich loam; a desirable tree for
interfere with the growth of grass above them; ill-adapted, like all the
readily obtainable in nurseries than the shellbark hickory and equally
 Propagated from the seed.

--Carya porcina.

 Winter buds.
  2.

 Sterile flower, back view.
  5.

 Fruiting branch.

=Carya amara, Nutt.


BITTERNUT.

=Habitat and Range.
damp fields, river valleys, along roadsides, occasional upon uplands and

     From Montreal west to Georgian bay.

Connecticut valley, where it ranges farther north than any other of our
the Green mountains and in the southern Connecticut valley;
Island and Connecticut,--common.

     Minnesota, Nebraska, Kansas, Indian territory, and Texas.

=--A tall, slender tree, 50-75 feet high and 1 foot-2-1/2 feet in
 The
capacious, spreading head, usually widest near the top, with lively
autumn.

=Bark.
plates; branches and branchlets smooth; leaf-scars prominent; season's

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
scythe-shaped, pointed, with a granulated surface; lateral buds much
 Leaves pinnately compound,
none; leaflets 5-11, opposite, 5-6 inches long, 1-2 inches wide, bright
turning to orange yellow in autumn; outline lanceolate, or narrowly oval
obtuse or rounded except that of the terminal leaflet, which is acute;
stem and is equal-sided; sometimes scarcely distinguishable from the
 porcina_; often decreasing regularly in size from the

=Inflorescence.
 Sterile and fertile flowers on the same tree,
season's shoots, or sometimes from the lateral buds of the preceding
threes, branching umbel-like from a common peduncle; scale 3-lobed,
narrower, considerably longer toward the end of the catkin; stamens
the end of the season's shoots; calyx 4-lobed, pubescent, adherent to

=Fruit.
 Single or in twos or threes at the ends of the
greater than the length; occasionally larger and somewhat pear-shaped:
prominently winged at the top or almost to the base, or nearly wingless:
bitter.

=--Hardy throughout New England; grows almost
 A most graceful
rather more rapidly than the shagbark or pignut, but more inclined than
 Seldom for sale by nurserymen or
 Grown readily from seed.

--Carya amara.

 Winter bud.
  2.

 Sterile flower, back view.
  4.

 Fertile flower.
  6.



 BIRCH FAMILY.

=Ostrya Virginica, Willd.

_
HOP HORNBEAM.
 LEVERWOOD.

=--In rather open woods and along highlands.


Common in all parts of New England.

     ranging through western Minnesota to Nebraska, Kansas, Indian

=Habit.
the ground, sometimes attaining, without much increase in height, a
or loosely and rather broadly conical; lower branches sometimes slightly
tendency; spray slender and rather stiff.
the elm; in its leaves, of the black birch; and in its fruit, of

=Bark.
longitudinally ridged, the short, thin segments in old trees often loose
season's shoots, dark reddish-brown.

=--Buds small, oblong, pointed, invested with
 Leaves simple, alternate, roughish, 2-4 inches
dark green above, lighter beneath; outline ovate to oblong-ovate,
base slightly and narrowly heart-shaped, rounded or truncate, mostly

=Inflorescence.
 Sterile flowers from wood of the
usually in threes; scales broad, laterally rounded, sharp-pointed,
sometimes forked, with anthers bearded at the tip: fertile catkins about
tapering to a long point, ciliate, each subtending two ovaries, each
linear.

=--Early September.
distended bract; the aggregated fruit resembling a cluster of hops.

=--Hardy throughout New England; prefers dry or
but of rather slow growth; useful in shady situations and worthy of a
 Seldom
 Propagated

[Illustration: PLATE XXVIII.
]
  1.

 Flowering branch.
  3.

 Sterile flower, front view.
  5.

 Fertile flower.
  7.


=
HORNBEAM.
 IRONWOOD.

=Habitat and Range.

     Province of Quebec to Georgian bay.


     South to Florida; west to Minnesota, Nebraska, Kansas, Indian

=Habit.
of 6-12 inches, rarely reaching 2 feet; trunk short, often given a
branches to the ground; in color and smoothness resembling the beech;
often zigzag but keeping the same general direction; head wide, close,

=Bark.
season's shoots light green turning brown, more or less hairy.

=--Leaf-buds small, oval or ovoid, acute to
 Leaves simple, alternate, 2-3 inches long, dull green above,
or slightly obovate oblong or broadly oval, irregularly and sharply
young; apex acuminate to acute; base rounded, truncate, acute, or
hairy; stipules pubescent, falling early.

=--May.
season in short, stunted-looking, lateral catkins, mostly single; scales
very short, mostly 2-forked; anthers bearded at the tip: fertile flowers
foliaceous, each subtending a green, ovate, acute, ciliate, deciduous

=Fruit.
enlarged, and leaf-like 3-lobed bracts, each bract subtending a

=Horticultural Value.
rich soil, near running water, on the edges of wet land or on rocky
 Its irregular outline and curiously ridged trunk make
 It is not often used,
do not bear removal well.

[Illustration: PLATE XXIX.
]
  1.

 Flowering branch.
  3.

 Sterile flower, front view.
  5.

 Fertile flower.
  7.


=
Inflorescence.
appearing with or before the leaves from shoots of the previous
or inclined in the bud, drooping when expanded in the following spring;
bractlets; each flower consisting of a 1-scaled calyx and 2 anthers,
each of which bears an anther cell: fertile catkins erect or inclined at
3-lobed bract falling with the nuts; bractlets none; calyx none; corolla


=
BLACK BIRCH.
 SWEET BIRCH.

=--Moist grounds; rich woods, old pastures, fertile

     Newfoundland and Nova Scotia to the Lake Superior region.

section, and along the Connecticut river valley to a short distance
and in the southern Connecticut valley (_Flora of Vermont_, 1900);
highlands, less often near the coast; Connecticut,--widely distributed,

     South to Delaware, along the mountains to Florida; west to

=Habit.
trunk diameter of 1-4 feet, often conspicuous along precipitous ledges,
picturesque forms.
wide-spreading, hemispherical head broadest at its base, the lower limbs
 The limbs are
into a delicate, polished spray.
purplish-yellow, pendulous catkins in spring, and in summer by its
autumn.

=--Bark of trunk on old trees very dark, separating and cleaving
reddish-brown, not separating into thin layers, smooth, with numerous
with shorter lateral lines; season's shoots with small, pale dots.
bark very aromatic, having a strong checkerberry flavor,--hence the
resemblance of its bark to that of the garden cherry.

=--Buds reddish-brown, oblong or conical,
 Leaves
shining green above and downy when young, paler beneath and
ovate-oblong, or oval; sharply serrate to doubly serrate; apex acute to
hairy when young; stipules soon falling.

=--April to May.
slender, purplish-yellow; scales fringed: fertile catkins erect or
bracts pubescent; lateral lobes wider than in _B.
_
=Fruit.
3 short, nearly equal diverging lobes: nut obovate-oblong, wider than

=Horticultural Value.
from swamps to hilltops, but prefers moist rocky slopes and a loamy or
collected plants are moved without serious difficulty; apt to grow

[Illustration: PLATE XXX.
]
  1.

 Flowering branch.
  3.

 Sterile flower, front view.
  5.

 Fruiting branch.
  7.

 Mature leaf.

=Betula lutea, Michx.
=
YELLOW BIRCH.

=Habitat and Range.

     Newfoundland and Nova Scotia to Rainy river.

lowland swamps to 1000 feet above the sea level; more common at
belts.

     and North Carolina; west to Minnesota.

=--A large tree, at its maximum in northern New England 60-90
 In the forest the main
rise at a sharp angle, curving slightly, forming a rather small,
broad-spreading, hemispherical, with numerous rather equal, long and
 In the
and branches make the yellow birch one of the most attractive trees of

=Bark.
lustreless, deep-seamed, split into thick plates, standing out at all
parted in ribbon-like strips, detached at one end and running up the
yellowish-green, minutely buff-dotted, woolly-pubescent, becoming in
horizontal lines.
not readily detachable like the bark of the canoe birch.

=--Buds conical, 1/4 inch long, mostly
 Leaves simple, in alternate pairs or
dull green on both sides, paler beneath and more or less pubescent on
serrate; apex acuminate or acute; base heart-shaped, obtuse or truncate;
falling.

=--April to May.
purplish-yellow; scales fringed: fertile catkins sessile or nearly so,
pubescent, lobes slightly spreading.

=--Fruiting catkins oblong or oblong-ovoid, about 1 inch long and
each end, pubescent on the upper part, about the width of its wing.

=--Hardy throughout New England; grows in wet or
constant supply of moisture; similar to the black birch, equally
transplanted without serious difficulty.


=--Bark reddish-brown, not separable into thin layers;
bark of twigs decidedly aromatic.

=--Bark yellow, separable into thin layers; leaves dull
fruiting catkins ovoid or oblong-ovoid; flavor of bark less distinctly

[Illustration: PLATE XXXI.
]
  1.

 Flower-buds.
  3.

 Sterile flowers.
  7.

 Bract.
  9.

 Fruit.

=Betula nigra, L.

 RIVER BIRCH.

=--Along rivers, ponds, and woodlands inundated a

     Doubtfully and indefinitely reported from Canada.

Hampshire,--found sparingly along streams in the southern part of the
 W.
Batchelder); Massachusetts,--along the Merrimac river and its

     South, east of the Alleghany mountains, to Florida; west, locally
     states to Texas; western limits, Nebraska, Kansas, Indian

=Habit.
ground of 1-1-1/2 feet; reaching much greater dimensions southward.
trunk, frequently beset with small, leafy, reflexed branchlets, and
develops a light and feathery head of variable outline, with numerous
with abundant dark-green foliage.

=--Reddish, more or less separable into layers, fraying into
reddish-brown, and deeply furrowed; branches dark red or cinnamon,
pale-dotted.

=--Buds small, mostly appressed near the ends of
 Leaves simple, alternate, 3-4 inches
soft-downy beneath, turning bright yellow in autumn; outline
and downy; stipules soon falling.

=--April to May.
inches long, scales 2-3-flowered: fertile catkins bright green,
tomentose, ciliate.

=--June.
catkins 1-2 inches long, cylindrical, erect or spreading; bracts with
longest: nut ovate to obovate, ciliate.

=--Hardy throughout New England; grows in all
vigorously and become attractive objects in landscape plantations;
branches better than the black or yellow birches.
nurseries, and rather hard to transplant; collected plants do fairly

[Illustration: PLATE XXXII.
]
  1.

 Flower-buds.
  3.

 Sterile flower.
  5.

 Scale of fertile flower.
  7.

 Fruiting branch.

=Betula populifolia, Marsh.

 GRAY BIRCH.
 POPLAR BIRCH.
BIRCH.

=Habitat and Range.
frequent along their borders, often springing up on burnt lands.


Maine,--abundant; New Hampshire,--abundant eastward, as far north as
the western and frequent in the southern sections; Massachusetts, Rhode

     South, mostly in the coast region, to Delaware; west to Lake

=Habit.
of 4-8 inches, occasionally much exceeding these dimensions; under
 The slender, seldom erect
unequal branches, which form by repeated subdivisions a profuse, slender
often hanging vertically or drooping at the ends.
by the airy lightness of the narrow open head and by the contrast of the
air stirs, by the delicacy, tremulous movement, and brilliancy of the

=Bark.
insertion of the branches; not easily separable into layers; branches
dots becoming horizontal lines and increasing in length with the age of
 The white of the bark does not readily come off upon clothing.

=--Buds somewhat diverging from the twig; narrow
 Leaves simple, alternate, single
paler beneath, smooth and shining on both sides, turning to a pale
triangular, coarsely and irregularly doubly serrate; apex taper-pointed;
stipules dropping early.

=--May.
slender-cylindrical, 2-3 inches long: fertile catkins erect, green,

=Fruit.
inches long and 1/2 inch in diameter, stalked; scales 3-parted above the
ovate to obovate, narrower than the wings, combined wings from broadly

=Horticultural Value.
kind of soil, finest specimens in deep, rich loam.
common, its graceful habit and attractive bark would be more appreciated
secured through collectors; young collected plants, if properly

[Illustration: PLATE XXXIII.
]
  1.

 Sterile flower, back view.
  3.

 Scale of fertile flower.
  5.

 Fruit.

=Betula papyrifera, Marsh.

 WHITE BIRCH.

=Habitat and Range.

     Canada, Atlantic to Pacific, northward to Labrador and Alaska, to

Maine,--abundant; New Hampshire,--in all sections, most common on
of the yellow birch; Vermont,--common; Massachusetts,--common in the
reported; Connecticut,--occasional in the southern sections, frequent

     South to Pennsylvania and Illinois; west to the Rocky mountains and

Var.
summits of northern New England.

=--A large tree, 50-75 feet high, with a diameter of 1-3 feet;
 The trunk develops a
an acute angle, with nearly horizontal secondary branches and a

green foliage, deep yellow in autumn, and the chalky whiteness of the
standing alone or grouped in forests.

=--Easily detachable in broad sheets and separable into thin,
the wood it covers.
fully exposed to the sun, lustreless, smooth or ragged-frayed, in very
plates; young trunks and smaller branches smooth, reddish or grayish
into more and more conspicuous horizontal lines.
readily rubs off upon clothing.

=--Buds small, ovate, flattish, acute to
 Leaves simple, alternate, 3-5 inches long, two-thirds as wide,
sometimes in young trees thickly glandular-dotted on both sides; outline
apex acute to acuminate; base somewhat heart-shaped, truncate or obtuse;

=Inflorescence.
 Sterile catkins mostly in threes, 3-4
slender-peduncled, erect or spreading; bracts puberulent.

=--Fruiting catkins 1-2 inches long, cylindrical, short-stalked,
combined wings butterfly-shaped, nearly twice as wide as long.

=--Hardy throughout New England; prefers a
situation; young trees rapid growing and vigorous, but with the same
birches; transplanted without serious difficulty; not offered by many

[Illustration: PLATE XXXIV.
]
  1.

 Flower-buds.
  3.

 Sterile flower, front view.
  5.

 Scale of fertile flower.
  7.

 Fruit.

=Alnus glutinosa, Medic.


This is the common alder of Great Britain and central Europe southward,
mountain slopes; introduced into the United States and occasionally
 In
, there are many of these plants growing about two small
them are several trees 30-40 feet in height and 8-12 inches in diameter
alders by their greater size, more erect habit, and darker trunks.


FAGACEÆ.


=
_Fagus Americana, Sweet.
_


=Habitat and Range.

Nova Scotia through Quebec and Ontario.

Connecticut-Merrimac watershed, enters largely into the composition of
Massachusetts,--in western sections abundant, common eastward;

     South to Florida; west to Wisconsin, Missouri, and Texas.

=--A tree of great beauty, rising to a height of 50-75 feet, with
attaining much greater dimensions; trunk remarkably smooth, sometimes
stout; head symmetrical, of various shapes,--rounded, oblong, or even
upward at their tips, near the point of branching horizontal or slightly
beautiful spray; roots numerous, light brown, long, and running near the
 Tree easily distinguishable in winter by the dried

=Bark.
old trees, often beautifully mottled in blotches or bands and invested
shining, reddish-brown; season's shoots a shining olive green,

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
tapering slowly to a sharp point; scales rich brown, lengthening as the
 Leaves set in plane of the spray, simple, alternate, 3-5
young, nearly smooth when fully grown, green on both sides, turning to
oval, serrate; apex acuminate; base rounded; veins strong, straight,
slender, silky, soon falling.

=--May.
shoots, sterile flowers from the lower axils, in heads suspended at the
yellowish-green, mostly 6-lobed; petals none; stamens 6-16; anthers
axils, usually single or in pairs, at the end of a short peduncle;
awl-shaped lobes; ovary 3-celled; styles 3.

=--A prickly bur, thick, 4-valved, splitting nearly to the base

=Horticultural Value.
good soil, but prefers deep, rich, well-drained loam; usually obtainable
 Its clean
of the most attractive of our large trees for use, summer or winter, in
is easily disfigured; it has a bad habit of throwing out suckers and is
 Propagated from the
 The purple beech, weeping beech, and fern-leaf beech are

[Illustration: PLATE XXXV.
]
  1.

 Flowering branch.
  3.

 Fertile flower.
  5.

 Section of fruit.
   7.


 Americana, Watson and Coulter.

 Castanea vesca, var.
_


=Habitat and Range.
woods, and hillsides.


Maine,--southern sections, probably not indigenous north of latitude 44°
Windsor, Vt.
occasional a short distance northward; Vermont,--common in the
far north as Windsor (Windsor county), West Rutland (Rutland county),
the state, but less frequent near the sea; Rhode Island and

     South to Delaware, along the mountains to Alabama; west to

=Habit.
feet and reaching a diameter of 5-6 feet above the swell of the roots,
often much greater proportions.
few feet from the ground into several stout horizontal or ascending
forming a stately, open, roundish, or inversely pyramidal head;
dense, casting a deep shade; flowers profuse, the long, sterile catkins
slopes at a great distance.
the white or red oak.

=--Bark of trunk in old trees deeply cleft with wide ridges, hard,
shoots green or purplish-brown, white-dotted.

=--Buds small, ovate, brown, acutish.
simple, alternate, 5-10 inches long, 1-3 inches wide, bright clear
oblong-lanceolate, sharply and coarsely serrate; veins straight,
leafstalk short; stipules soon falling.

=--June to July.
shoots, after the leaves have grown to their full size; sterile catkins
slender, flowers pale yellowish-green or cream-colored; calyx pubescent,
discharging their pollen: fertile flowers near the base of the upper
6-toothed; ovary ovate, styles as many as the cells of the ovary,

=Fruit.
4 valves: nuts 1-5, dark brown, covered with whitish down at apex, flat
sweet and edible.

=--Hardy throughout New England; prefers fertile,
usually obtainable in nurseries.
broad-spreading head and attractive flowers make it a valuable tree for
fruit are a serious disadvantage.

[Illustration: PLATE XXXVI.
 Americana.

 Winter buds.
  2.

 Sterile flower.
  4.

 Fruit.
  6.


=
Inflorescence appearing with the leaves in spring; sterile catkins from
usually several in a cluster, unbranched, long, cylindrical, pendulous;
stamens 3-12, undivided: fertile flowers terminal or axillary upon the
becoming the cupule or cup around the lower part of the acorn; ovary



Leaves with obtuse or rounded lobes or teeth; cup-scales thickened or
year.

BLACK OAKS.

stigmas on spreading styles; fruit maturing the second year.

=Quercus alba, L.


=Habitat and Range.
often constituting extensive tracts of forest.


Maine,--southern sections; New Hampshire,--most abundant eastward; in
of the river, extending up the tributary streams a short distance and
 F.
Flint); Vermont,--common west of the Green mountains, less so in the
Rhode Island, and Connecticut,--common.

     Arkansas, and Texas.

=--A tree of the first rank, 50-75 feet high and 1-6 feet in
in general appearance, trunk sometimes dissolving into branches like the
 The finest specimens
stout, horizontal, far-reaching limbs, conspicuously gnarled and twisted
the diameter at the base of which is sometimes two or three times the

=Bark.
white, broken into long, thin, loose, irregular, soft-looking flakes; in
ash-gray, mottled; young shoots grayish-green, roughened with minute

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
reddish-brown.
wide, delicately reddish-tinted and pubescent upon both sides when
somewhat glaucous beneath, turning to various reds in autumn; outline
trees; when few, short and wide-based, with comparatively shallow
somewhat linear-oblong, with sinuses reaching nearly to midrib; apex of
soon falling.
spring, especially in young trees.

=--May.
catkins 2-3 inches long, with slender, usually pubescent thread; calyx
short-peduncled, reddish, ovate-scaled.

=--Maturing in the autumn of the first year, single, or more
saucer-shaped, rather thin; scales rough-knobby at base: acorn varying
said to be when boiled a good substitute for chestnuts.

=--Hardy in New England; grows well in all except
difficult to transplant unless prepared by frequent transplanting in
very slowly and nearly uniformly up to maturity; comparatively free
attacks immature leaves in spring.

[Illustration: PLATE XXXVII.
]
  1.

 Flowering branch.
  3-4.

 Fertile flower, side view.
  6.

 Variant leaves.

=Quercus stellata, Wang.

 obtusiloba, Michx.
 minor, Sarg_.

 BOX WHITE OAK.

=
     Doubtfully reported from southern Ontario.

Massachusetts,--southern Cape Cod from Falmouth to Brewster, the most
Vineyard where it is rather common, and Nantucket where it is rare;
(L.
 Russell); Connecticut,--occasional along the shores of Long

     South to Florida; west to Kansas, Indian territory, and Texas.

=--Farther south, a tree of the first magnitude, reaching a
England occasionally attaining in woodlands a height of 50-60 feet; at
with a diameter at the ground of 6-12 inches.
stout, tough, and often conspicuously crooked branches, the lower
dark green, dense foliage.
stretching along the ground as if from an underground stem.

=--Resembling that of the white oak, but rather a darker gray,
limbs brownish-gray, rough-dotted; season's shoots densely

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
scales minutely pubescent or scurfy.
inches long, two-thirds as wide, thickish, yellowish-green and tomentose
above, lighter beneath, both sides still somewhat scurfy; general
extremely variable; type-form 5-lobed, all the lobes rounded, the three
two lower tapering to an acute, rounded, or truncate base; sinuses deep,
tomentose; stipules linear, pubescent, occasionally persistent till
 The leaves are often arranged at the tips of the branches in

=Inflorescence.
 Sterile catkins 1-3 inches long, connecting
stamens 4-8, _anthers with scattered hairs_: pistillate flowers single

=Fruit.
or in clusters of 2, 3, or more, on short footstalks: cup top-shaped or
scales smooth or sometimes hairy along the top, acutish or roundish,

=Horticultural Value.
well-drained, open soil; quite as slow-growing as the white oak; seldom
 Propagated from the

[Illustration: PLATE XXXVIII.
]
  1.

 Flowering branch.
  3.

 Sterile flower, front view.
  5.

 Fruiting branch.

=Quercus macrocarpa, Michx.

 OVER-CUP OAK.

=Habitat and Range.

     Nova Scotia to Manitoba, not attaining in this region the size of

Maine,--known only in the valleys of the middle Penobscot (Orono)
about Lake Champlain, especially in Addison county, not common;
and towns south along the Housatonic river (Berkshire county); Rhode
central and eastern sections, possibly native near the northern border.

     Kansas, Indian territory, and Texas.

=--A medium-sized tree, 40-60 feet high, with a trunk diameter of
trunk erect, branches often changing direction, ascending, save the
lowest branches often declined or drooping; head wide-spreading, rounded
luxuriance of the dark-green foliage and in autumn by the size of its

=Bark.
the white oak, separating on old trees into rather firm, longitudinal
wing-like layers; season's shoots yellowish-brown, minutely hairy, with

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
scattered along the shoots and clustered at the enlarged tips.
simple, alternate, 6-9 inches long, 3-4 inches broad, smooth and dark
varying from irregularly and deeply sinuate-lobed, especially near the
linear, pubescent.

=--May.
5-parted, yellowish-green; divisions linear-oblong, more or less
sessile or short-stemmed; scales reddish; stigma red.

=--Maturing the first season; extremely variable; sessile or
diameter, with thick, close, pointed scales, the upper row often
often very large, sometimes sunk deeply and occasionally entirely in the

=Horticultural Value.
resembling the swamp white oak, but better adapted to upland; grows
seldom disfigured by insects or disease; occasionally grown in
 Propagated from seed.
acorns (var.

[Illustration: PLATE XXXIX.
]
  1.

 Flowering branch.
  3.

 Sterile flower, front view.
  5.

 Fruiting branch.

=Quercus bicolor, Willd.

_
SWAMP WHITE OAK.

=--In deep, rich soil; low, moist, fertile

     Quebec to Ontario, where it is known as the blue oak.

of the Souhegan, and probably throughout Rockingham county;
the western and central sections, common eastward; Rhode Island and

     South to Delaware and along the mountains to northern Georgia; west

=Habit.
2-3 feet; attaining southward of the Great Lakes and in the Ohio basin
in general aspect; trunk erect, continuous, in young trees often beset
by a rather regular pyramidal head, the lower branches horizontal or
abundant, and bushy spray; smaller twigs ridgy, widening beneath buds;
open, with a general resemblance to the head of the white oak, but

=Bark.
longitudinally striate, with flaky scales; bark of young stems,
back, giving the tree its shaggy aspect; season's shoots

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
 Leaves
unfolding, at maturity thick and firm, smooth and dark shining green
brownish-yellow; obovate, coarsely and deeply crenate or obtusely
wedge-shaped base, often constricted near the center; leafstalk short;

=Inflorescence.
 Sterile catkins 2-3 inches long, thread hairy;
yellow, glabrous: pistillate flowers tomentose, on rather long, hairy

=Fruit.
single or frequently in twos: cup rounded, rather thin, deep, rough to
oblong-ovoid, more or less tapering: meat sweet, edible.

=--Hardy throughout New England; grows in any good
land, where its roots can find a constant supply of water; growth fairly
nurserymen and rather less difficult to transplant than most of the
 Its sturdy, rugged habit and rich dark green foliage make it a

[Illustration: PLATE XL.
]
  1.

 Flowering branch.
  3.

 Sterile flower, front view.
  5.

 Fruiting branch.

=Quercus Prinus, L.

 ROCK CHESTNUT OAK.

=--Woods, rocky banks, hill slopes.


Maine,--Saco river and Mt.
county); New Hampshire,--belts or patches in the eastern part of the
Manchester, Hudson; Vermont,--western part of the state throughout, not
along the western flank of the Green mountains, at least in Addison
Middleboro, rare in Medford and Sudbury, frequent on the Blue hills;

     South to Delaware and along the mountains to Georgia, extending
 Pisgah in North Carolina; west to

=Habit.
diameter of 1-2-1/2 feet, assuming noble proportions southward, often
tall, straight, continuous to the top of the tree, scarcely tapering to

=Bark.
blackish, in firm, broad, continuous ridges, with small, close surface
less lustrous; season's shoots light brown.

=--Buds ovate to cylindrical, mostly acute,
 Leaves simple, alternate, 5-8 inches long, 2-5 inches wide,
outline obovate to oval, undulate-crenate; apex blunt-pointed; base
straight, parallel, prominent beneath; leafstalk 1/2-1-1/2 inches long;

=Inflorescence.
 Sterile catkins 2-3 inches long; calyx
5-9; anthers yellow, glabrous: pistillate flowers with hairy scales and

=Fruit.
on stems usually equal to or shorter than the leaf-stems: cup thin,
at the base: acorns 3/4-1-1/2 inches long, ovoid-conical, sweet.

=--Hardy throughout New England; prefers a light
and safely transplanted than most oaks; occasionally offered by
 Its vigorous, clean habit of
gardening and street use.

--Quercus Prinus.

 Winter buds.
  2.

 Sterile flower, back view.
  4.

 Fertile flowers.
  6.

 Variant leaf.

=Quercus Muhlenbergii, Engelm.

_
CHESTNUT OAK.

=--Dry hillsides, limestone ridges, rich bottoms.


Vermont,--Gardner's island, Lake Champlain; Ferrisburg (Pringle);
 N.
in the neighborhood of Kent (Litchfield county, C.
 Averill); often
 Prinus_; probably there are other
 Not authoritatively reported from the other New England

     South to Delaware and District of Columbia, along the mountains to
     territory, and Texas.

=--A medium-sized tree, 30-40 feet high, with a trunk diameter of
Mississippi, and their tributaries; trunk in old trees enlarged at the
oblong or roundish head.

=--Bark of trunk and large branches grayish or pale ash-colored,
early summer purplish-green with pale dots.

=--Buds ovate, acute to obtuse, brownish.
simple, alternate; in the typical form as recognized by Muhlenburg, 3-6
minutely downy beneath; outline lanceolate or lanceolate-oblong, with
base wedge-shaped or acute; stipules soon falling.
of the species in which the leaves are much larger, 5-7 inches in length
distinguishable from _Q.

=Inflorescence.
 Appearing with the leaves; sterile catkins 2-4
anthers yellow: pistillate flowers sessile or on short spikes; stigma

=Fruit.
covering about half the nut, thin, shallow, with small, rarely much

=Horticultural Value.
moist soils, in open or partly shaded situations; maintains a nearly
insects.
plantations.

[Illustration: PLATE XLII.
]
  1.

 Flowering branch.
  3.

 Fertile flowers.
  5.


=
SCRUB WHITE OAK.

More or less common throughout the states east of the Mississippi;
 Muhlenbergii_, within the limits of
 The
regularly and coarsely toothed, bright green and often lustrous on the


=
RED OAK.

=--Growing impartially in a great variety of soils,

     Nova Scotia and New Brunswick to divide west of Lake Superior.

Hampshire,--extending into Coos county, far north of the
Connecticut,--common; probably in most parts of New England the most
white oak.

     reported from Florida; west to Minnesota, Nebraska, Kansas, and

=Habit.
diameter of 2-6 feet above the swell of the roots; occasionally
tree, often heavily buttressed; point of branching higher than in the
angle, the lower sometimes horizontal; branchlets rather slender; head
well-proportioned, and imposing; sometimes oblong in outline, wider near
the head of the white oak; conspicuous in summer by its bright green,

=Bark.
gray, firmly, coarsely, and rather regularly ridged, smooth elsewhere;
at first green, taking a reddish tinge in autumn, marked with pale,

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
 Leaves
above, paler beneath, dull brown in autumn; outline oval or obovate,
_Q.
with parallel sides bristle-pointed; leafstalks short; stipules linear,

=Inflorescence.
May, when the leaves are half-grown; sterile catkins 3-5 inches long;
pistillate flowers short-stemmed; calyx lobes mostly 3 or 4; stigmas

=Fruit.
short-stalked: cup sometimes turbinate, usually saucer-shaped with a
a kind of border; scales closely imbricated, reddish-brown, more or less
nearly cylindrical or ovoid, tapering to a broad, rounded top.

=--Hardy throughout New England; grows in all
obtainable than most of our oaks; in common with other trees of the
safety; grows rapidly and is fairly free from disfiguring insects; the
 When once established, it
use in street and landscape plantations.

[Illustration: PLATE XLIII.
]
  1.

 Flowering branch.
  3.

 Fertile flowers, side view.
  5.


=
SCARLET OAK.

=--Most common in dry soil.


Maine,--valley of the Androscoggin, southward; New Hampshire and
Massachusetts,--more common in the eastern than western sections,
Connecticut,--common.

     Carolina and Tennessee; reported from Florida; west to Minnesota,

=Habit.
diameter; attaining greater dimensions southward; trunk straight and
the lower nearly horizontal, often declined at the ends; branchlets
cut, shining green in summer and flaming scarlet in autumn; the most

=Bark.
bark red; young trees and branches smoothish, often marked with dull red

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
acutish, partially hidden by enlarged base of petiole.
alternate, extremely variable, more commonly 3-6 inches long, two-thirds
sides but often with a tufted pubescence on the axils beneath, turning
nearly to the midrib; lobes 5-9, rather slender and set at varying
to acute; leafstalk 1-1-1/2 inches long, slender, swollen at base.

=--Early in May.
grown; sterile catkins 2-4 inches long; calyx most commonly 4-parted;
pistillate flowers red; stigmas long, spreading, reflexed.

=--Maturing in the autumn of the second year, single or in twos
cup-shaped, about half the length of the acorn, occasionally nearly
appressed, firm, elongated, triangular, sides sometimes rounded,
shape, oftenest oval to oblong: kernel white within; less bitter than

=Horticultural Value.
light, well-drained soil, but prefers a fertile loam.
offered by nurserymen, but as it is disposed to make unsymmetrical young

colors in autumn make it desirable in ornamental plantations.
from the seed.

--Quercus coccinea.

 Winter buds.
  2.

 Sterile flowers, side view.
  4.

 Fruiting branch.

=Quercus velutina, Lam.

 Quercus coccinea_, var.
_
BLACK OAK.

=Habitat and Range.

     Southern and western Ontario.

eastward, absent on the highlands, reappearing within three or four
Vermont,--western and southeastern sections; Massachusetts,--abundant

     South to the Gulf states; west to Minnesota, Kansas, Indian

=Habit.
diameter, exceptionally much larger, attaining its maximum in the Ohio
 coccinea_ in the general
rounded; trunk short; foliage deep shining green, turning yellowish or

=Bark.
seashore, thick, usually rough near the ground even in young trees, in
adherent block-like strips; inner bark thick, yellow, and bitter;
scurfy-pubescent.

=--Buds 1/8-1/4 inch long, bluntish to pointed,
 Leaves simple, alternate,
XLV, 8) varying towards _b_ (Plate XLV, 6), and _b_ often scarcely
obovate to oval, lobes usually 7, densely woolly when opening, more or
above, lighter beneath, becoming brown or dull red in autumn.


Form _b_, sinuses deep, extending halfway to the midrib or farther,

=Inflorescence.
 Appearing when the leaves are half
calyx usually 3-4-lobed; lobes ovate, acute to rounded, hairy-pubescent;
pubescent, at first nearly sessile; stigmas 3, red, divergent,

=Fruit.
footstalks: cup top-shaped to hemispherical; scales less firm than in
 coccinea_, tips papery and transversely rugulose, obtuse or rounded,
and open edge of the cup: acorn small: kernel yellow within and bitter.

=--Hardy throughout New England; grows in
rapid growth when young, but as it soon begins to show dead branches and
offered by nurserymen.

=Note.
 coccinea_, from which it may be
bitter taste of the inner bark, its somewhat larger and more pointed
leaves, the longer continuance of scurf or pubescence upon the leaves,
color and bitter taste of the nut.

--Quercus velutina.

 Winter buds.
  2.

 Sterile flower, 4-lobed calyx.
  4.

 Fertile flower.
  6.

 Fruit.
  8.


=
PIN OAK.
 WATER OAK.

=--Low grounds, borders of forests, wet woods, river

     Ontario.

(Stone, _Bull.
 E.
Springfield, south to Connecticut, rare; Rhode Island,--southern
Pawcatuck river (L.
 Russell); Connecticut,--common along the sound,
to the Massachusetts line.

     Minnesota, east Kansas, Missouri, Arkansas, and Indian territory.

=--A medium-sized tree, 40-50 feet high, with trunk diameter of
 W.
but attaining its maximum of 100 feet in height and upward in the basins
with short, drooping branchlets, lower tier of branches short and mostly
shoots, which give rise to the common name; head graceful, open, rounded
foliage delicate; bright shining green in autumn, often turning to a

=Bark.
trees grayish-brown, smoothish; branchlets shining, light brown.

=--Buds short, conical, acute.
alternate, 3-5 inches long, bright green, smooth and shining above,
broadly obovate to ovate; lobes divergent, triangular, toothed or
stipules linear, soon falling.

=--May.
catkins 2-4 inches long; segments of calyx mostly 4 or 5, obtuse or
glabrous: pistillate flowers with broadly ovate scales; stigmas stout,

=Fruit.
saucer-shaped, with firm, appressed scales, shallow: acorns ovoid to
entire length of fruit.

=--Probably hardy throughout New England; grows in
growth, readily and safely transplanted, and but little disfigured by
 Propagated from the seed.

--Quercus palustris.

 Winter buds.
  2.

 Sterile flower, side view.
  4.

 Fruiting branch.

=Quercus ilicifolia, Wang.

 Quercus pumila, Sudw.

 BEAR OAK.

=--In poor soils; sandy plains, gravelly or rocky

Maine,--frequent in eastern and southern sections and upon Mount Desert
lower Connecticut; Vermont,--in the eastern and southern sections as far
Connecticut,--too abundant, forming in favorable situations dense

     South to Ohio and the mountain regions of North Carolina and

=Habit.
reaching a height of 15-25 feet; trunk short, sometimes in peaty swamps
throwing out numerous branchlets of similar habit, forming a stiff,
greens and reds of the opening leaves and reds and yellows of the
 Sometimes associated with _Q.

=Bark.
small trunks and branches grayish-brown, not furrowed or scaly; younger
yellowish-green, with a tawny, scurfy pubescence.

=--Buds 1/8-1/4 inch long, ovoid or conical,
 Leaves
reddish above and woolly on both sides, when mature yellowish-green and
pubescent beneath; very variable in outline and in the number (3-7) and
angular lobes, the two lower much smaller; base unequal, wedge-shaped,

=Inflorescence.
 Appearing when the leaves are half
2-3, rounded; stamens 3-5; anthers red or yellow: pistillate flowers
reddish, recurved, spreading.

=--Abundant, maturing in the autumn of the second year, clustered
hemispherical: acorn about 1/2 inch long, varying greatly in shape,

=Horticultural Value.
gravelly, ledgy, or sandy soil, where few other trees thrive; useful in
procurable in quantity from nurseries, it must be grown from the seed.
The leaves are at times stripped off by caterpillars, but otherwise it

[Illustration: PLATE XLVII.
]
  1.

 Sterile flower, side view.
  3.

 Fruiting branch.
  5.



 ELM FAMILY.

=Ulmus Americana, L.

 AMERICAN ELM.

=Habitat and Range.
intervales.


Maine,--common, most abundant in central and southern portions; New
sea; in the remaining New England states very common, attaining its
valley.


=Habit.
stately and graceful of the New England trees, 50-110 feet high and 1-8
erect, more or less feathered or naked trunk, which loses itself
a wide angle, and by a spreading head widest near the top.
of these elements give rise to various well-marked forms which have

1.
trunk separates into several large branches which rise, slowly
smaller branches and spray becoming pendent.

 In the umbrella form the trunk remains entire nearly to the top of
shallow arch, fringed at the circumference with long, drooping

3.
considerable height, begins to curve midway, and is capped with a

4.
greater droop of the branches, which sometimes sweep the ground.

 In the oak form the limbs are more or less tortuous and less arching,

In all forms short, irregular, pendent branchlets are occasional along
 The trees most noticeably feathered are usually of medium
itself in a copious fringe, which sometimes invests and obliterates the
 Conspicuous at all
bursting, or when the myriads of flowers, insignificant singly, give in
airy masses of deep green in summer or pale yellow in autumn, or in
distinguish it from all other trees.
run a great distance.

=--Dark gray, irregularly and broadly striate, rather firmly
branches ash-gray, smooth; branchlets reddish-brown; season's shoots

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
acute, smooth.
wide, dark green and roughish above, lighter and downy at first beneath;
serrate; apex abruptly pointed; base half acute, half rounded, produced
prominent; leafstalk stout, short; stipules small, soon falling.
drop in early autumn.

=--April.
season's shoots; flowers brown or purplish, mostly perfect, with
7-9-lobed, hairy or smooth; stamens 7-9, filaments slender, anthers

=Fruit.
1/2 inch in diameter, oval or ovate, smooth on both sides, hairy on
incurved points.

=--Hardy throughout New England; grows in any soil,
overarching branches and moderate shade; grows rapidly, throws out few
insect enemies that it is not planted as freely as heretofore;
along near the surface for a great distance.
nurseries, usually from seed, sometimes from small collected plants.
Though so extremely variable in outline, there are no important

[Illustration: PLATE XLVIII.
]
  1.

 Flowering branch.
  3.

 Fruiting branch.
  5.


=
_Ulmus pubescens, Walt.

 RED ELM.

=--Rich, low grounds, low, rocky woods and hillsides.

 Lawrence, apparently not abundant.

 1853,
Hampshire,--valley of the Connecticut, usually disappearing within ten
Vermont,--frequent; Massachusetts,--rare in the eastern sections,
--infrequent; Connecticut,--occasional.


=Habit.
diameter of 1-2-1/2 feet; head in proportion to the height of the tree,
buds and rusty-green, dense and rough foliage.

=--Bark of trunk brown and in old trees deeply furrowed; larger
rough, marked with numerous dots, downy; season's shoots light gray and
"
=Winter Buds and Leaves.
obtuse, very dark, densely tomentose, very conspicuous just before
 Leaves simple, alternate, 4-8 inches long, 3-4 inches wide,
maturity pale rusty-green and very rough both ways upon the upper
sweet-scented when dried; outline oblong, ovate-oblong, or oval, doubly
inequilateral; leafstalk short, rough, hairy; stipules small, soon

=Inflorescence.
 Preceding the leaves, from the lateral
flowers; sterile, fertile, and perfect on the same tree; calyx
flattened; styles two, purple, downy.

=--A samara, winged all round, 3/4 inch in diameter, roundish,


=Horticultural Value.
various situations, but prefers a light, sandy or gravelly soil near
 Americana_, and is less
make it worthy of a place in ornamental plantations.
seed.

--Ulmus fulva.

 Winter buds.
  2.
  3.

 Flower, side view, part of perianth and stamens removed.
  5.

 Fruiting branch.

=Ulmus racemosa, Thomas.

 ROCK ELM.

=--Dry, gravelly soils, rich soils, river banks.


Maine,--not reported; New Hampshire,--rare and extremely local; Meriden
(Robbins), Knowlton (Brainerd), Highgate (Eggleston); comparatively
 H.
Forest_, V, 86); Massachusetts,--rare; Rhode Island and

     South to Tennessee; west to Minnesota, Iowa, Nebraska and Missouri.

=--A large tree, scarcely inferior at its best to _U.
50-75 feet high, with a trunk diameter of 2-3 feet; reaching in southern
slender; branches short and stout, often twiggy in the interior of the
head rather narrow, round-topped.

=--Bark of trunk brownish-gray, in old trees irregularly separated
conspicuous; season's shoots light brown, more or less pubescent or
with corky, wing-like ridges.

=--Buds ovate to oblong, pointed, scales
 Leaves simple, alternate, 3-4 inches long,
doubly serrate (less sharp than the serratures in _U.
acuminate; base inequilateral, produced and rounded on one side, acute
stout; stipules soon falling.

=--April to May.
buds of the preceding season, in drooping racemes; calyx lobes 7-8,
thread-like, jointed; stamens 5-10, exserted, anthers purple, ovary

=Fruit.
densely fringed, resembling fruit of _U.

=Horticultural Value.
rich soil, in open situations; less variable in habit than the American
justify its extensive use as a substitute.
nurseries, but readily transplanted, and easily propagated from the

[Illustration: PLATE L.
]
  1.

 Flowering branch.
  3.

 Flower, side view, perianth and stamens partly removed.
  5.



HACKBERRY.
 HOOP ASH.

=Habitat and Range.
banks, near salt marshes.


Maine,--not reported; New Hampshire,--sparingly along the Connecticut
common; Norwich and Windsor on the Connecticut (Eggleston);
(Bailey); Connecticut,--common (J.
 Bishop).


=Habit.
diameter of 8 inches to 2 feet; attaining farther south a maximum of 100
commonly the rough, straight trunk, sometimes buttressed at the base,
numerous slender, horizontal or slightly drooping and more or less
deep green foliage which lasts into late autumn with little change in

=Bark.
trees with deep, short ridges; main branches corrugated; secondary
reddish-brown, often downy, more or less shining.

=--Buds small, ovate, acute, scales chestnut
 Leaves simple, alternate, extremely variable in size, outline,
green, and scarcely rough above, more or less pubescent beneath, with
serrate above the lower third; apex usually narrowly and sharply
slender; stipules lanceolate, soon falling.

=--May.
season's shoots, sterile and fertile flowers usually separate on the
of the shoot, the fertile in the axils above, usually solitary; calyx
length of the 4 lobes, in the sterile exserted; ovary with two long,

=Fruit.
fruit of the wild red cherry, purplish-red when ripe, thin-meated,

=Horticultural Value.
well-drained soils, but prefers a deep, rich, moist loam.
grow rather slowly and are more or less distorted, and trees of the same
desirable street tree, but it appears well in ornamental grounds.
disease which seriously disfigures the tree is extending to New England,
 Occasionally offered

[Illustration: PLATE LI.
]
  1.

 Flowering branch.
  3.

 Fertile flower.
  5.



 MULBERRY FAMILY.

=Morus rubra, L.


=Habitat and Range.

     Canadian shore of Lake Erie.

 Maine,--doubtfully reported; New
Vermont,--northern extremity of Lake Champlain, banks of the Connecticut
Rhode Island,--no station reported; Connecticut,--rare; Bristol,
 N.

    South to Florida; west to Michigan, South Dakota, and Texas.

=--A small tree, 15-25 feet in height, with a trunk diameter of
Mississippi basins; a wide-branching, rounded tree, characterized by a
that of the high blackberry.

=--Trunk light brown, rough, and more or less furrowed according
somewhat downy.

=--Buds ovate, obtuse.
4-8 inches long, two-thirds as wide, rough above, yellowish-green and
turning yellow in autumn; conspicuously reticulated; outline variable,
teeth, or irregularly 3-7-lobed; apex acuminate; base heart-shaped to

=Inflorescence.
 Appearing with the leaves from the season's
same tree, sometimes on different trees,--sterile flowers in spreading
stamens 4, the inflexed filaments of which suddenly straighten
calyx 4-parted, becoming fleshy in fruit; ovary sessile; stigmas 2,

=Fruit.
 In drooping spikes about 1 inch long and 1/2
apparently a simple fruit but really made up of the thickened calyx

=Horticultural Value.
a good, moist soil in sun or shade; the large leaves start late and drop
undergrowth in woods; readily transplanted, but seldom offered for sale

[Illustration: PLATE LII.
]
  1.

 Branch with sterile flowers.
  3.

 Sterile flower expanded.
  5.

 Fertile flower, side view.
  7.


=
Probably a native of China, where its leaves have from time immemorial
India and central and southern Europe; introduced likewise into the
spontaneous near dwellings, old trees sometimes marking the sites of

It may be distinguished from _M.
its whitish or pinkish fruit, and its greater susceptibility to frost.


MAGNOLIACEÆ.


=
TULIP TREE.
 POPLAR.

=--Prefers a rich, loamy, moist soil.

state; Massachusetts,--frequent in the Connecticut river valley and
Worcester county (R.
 Harper, _Rhodora_, II, 122); Rhode Island and
of the latter state.

     eastern sections of Missouri and Arkansas; attains great size in
     Mississippi river bottoms.

=--A medium-sized tree, 50-70 feet high; trunk 2-3 feet in
cone-shaped, in the dense forest lifted high and spreading; branches
becoming scraggly with age.
green, cone-like fruit, and conspicuous bright green truncate leaves

=Bark.
at length dark, seamed, and furrowed; the older branches gray; the
leaf-scars; glabrous or dusty-pubescent; bark of roots pale brown,

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
flattish; covered by two chestnut-brown dotted scales, which persist as
which develop one after the other.
inches long and nearly as broad, dark green and smooth on the upper
and russet brown in autumn; usually with four rounded or pointed lobes,
indentation or notch more or less broad and shallow at the top; all the
or heart-shaped; leafstalks as long or longer than the blade, slender,
often persisting till the leaf is fully developed.

=--Late May or early June.
terminal, held erect by a stout stem, tulip-shaped, 1-1/2-2 inches long,
 There are two triangular bracts which
reflexed; six greenish-yellow petals with an orange spot near the base
clinging together about a central axis.

=--Cone-like, formed of numerous carpels, often abortive, which
the cavity at its base one or two orange seeds which hang out for a time

=Horticultural Value.
in the coldest parts of New England; difficult to transplant, but
its foliage till mid-fall, shedding it in a short time when mature;
loam.
 Mostly propagated by seed,
and usually obtainable in large quantities.
nurserymen, one has an upright habit approaching that of the Lombardy

[Illustration: PLATE LIII.
]
  1.

 Opening leaf-bud with stipules.
  3.

 Fruit.
  5.

 Carpel with seeds.


LAURACEÆ.


=
_Sassafras Sassafras, Karst.


=Habitat and Range.
woods, along the borders of peaty swamps.


Maine,--this tree grows not beyond Black Point (Scarboro, Cumberland
again by botanists for more than two hundred years; rediscovered at
 C.
New Hampshire,--lower Merrimac valley, eastward to the coast and along
the center; Pownal (Robbins, Eggleston); Hartland and Brattleboro
eastern sections; Rhode Island and Connecticut,--common.


=Habit.
height of 40-50 feet and a trunk diameter of 2-4 feet; attaining a
and a trunk diameter of 6-7 feet; head open, flattish or rounded;
marked in winter by the contrasting reddish-brown of the trunk, the
early spring by the drooping racemes of yellow flowers, in autumn by the
the aromatic odor and spicy flavor of all parts of the tree, especially

=Bark.
old trees, in young trees greenish-gray, finely and irregularly striate,
work; branchlets reddish-brown, marked with warts of russet brown;
mottled, bright yellowish-green.

=--Flower-buds conspicuous, terminal, ovate to
inner glossy, pubescent; lateral buds much smaller.
alternate, often opposite, 3-5 inches long, two-thirds as wide,
lighter beneath, with midrib conspicuous and minutely hairy; outline of
wedge-shaped at base; the other oval to obovate, mitten-shaped or
rounded; base wedge-shaped; leafstalk about 1 inch long; stipules none.

=--April or early May.
slender, bracted, greenish-yellow, corymbous racemes, from terminal buds
trees,--sterile flowers with 9 stamens, each of the three inner with two
wanting: fertile flowers with 6 rudimentary stamens in one row; ovary

=Fruit.
bright red stalk.

=--Hardy throughout New England; adapted to a great
 Its
make it an extremely interesting tree in plantations, but it has always
can be moved readily.

[Illustration: PLATE LIV.
]
  1.

 Branch with sterile flowers.
  3.

 Branch with fertile flowers.
  5.

 Fruiting branch.


HAMAMELIDACEÆ.


=
SWEET GUM.

=--Low, wet soil, swamps, moist woods.

from the seacoast; Darien to Five Mile river, probably the northeastern

     South to Florida; west to Missouri and Texas.

=--Tree 40-60 feet high, with a trunk diameter of 10 inches to 2
Ohio and Mississippi valleys; trunk tall and straight; branches rather
horizontal or declining; branchlets beset with numerous short, rather
symmetrical; conspicuous in summer by its deep green, shining foliage,
long-stemmed, globular fruit, which does not fall till spring.

=--Trunk gray or grayish-brown, in old trees deeply furrowed and
brown-gray; branchlets with or without prominent corky ridges on the

=Winter Buds and Leaves.

turning to reds, purples, and yellows in autumn, cut into the figure of
on the upper surface, fragrant when bruised; base more or less

=Inflorescence.
 Developing from a bud of the season; sterile
none, stamens many, intermixed with minute scales: fertile flowers
scales; corolla none; pistil with 2-celled ovary and 2 long styles.

=--In spherical, woody heads, about 1 inch in diameter, suspended
coherent ovaries, holding on till spring, each containing one or two

=Horticultural Value.
grows in good wet or dry soils, preferring clays.
tender in Massachusetts, but if protected a few seasons until well
 It is offered by
rate of growth rather slow and nearly uniform to maturity.
from seed.

--Liquidambar styraciflua.

 Winter buds.
  2.

 Sterile flower.
  4.

 Fruiting branch.


PLATANACEÆ.


=
BUTTONWOOD.
 BUTTONBALL.

=Habitat and Range.

     Ontario.

valley towards the coast; along the Connecticut as far as Walpole;
Hoosac in Pownal (Eggleston); Massachusetts,--occasional; Rhode Island

     South to Florida; west to Minnesota, Nebraska, Kansas, and Texas.

=--A tree of the first magnitude, 50-100 feet and upwards in
the Ohio and Mississippi valleys a maximum of 125 feet in height and a
conspicuous by its great height, massive trunk and branches, and by its
 The
curiously mottled patchwork bark; and the long-stemmed, globular fruit

The lower branches are often very long and almost horizontal, and the
to the action of a fungous disease on the young growth.

=--Bark of trunk and large branches dark greenish-gray, sometimes
brittle scales, exposing the green or buff inner bark, which becomes
towards the ends, marked with numerous inconspicuous dots.

=--Buds short, ovate, obtuse, enclosed in the
by the leaf-scar.
pubescent on both sides when young, at maturity light rusty-green above,
coriaceous; outline reniform; margin coarse-toothed or sinuate-lobed,
truncate; leafstalk 1-2 inches long, swollen at the base; stipules

=Inflorescence.
 In crowded spherical heads; flowers of both kinds
lateral buds of the preceding season, on short and pendulous stems;
the season, on long, slender stems, made up of closely compacted ovate
recurved styles, with bright red stigmas.

=--In heads, mostly solitary, about 1 inch in diameter,

=Horticultural Value.
rich, loamy soil near water, but grows in almost any situation; of more
freely in ornamental grounds and on streets, but fungous diseases
leaves that it is now seldom obtainable in nurseries; usually propagated
 The European plane, now largely grown in some nurseries, is a

[Illustration: PLATE LVI.
]
  1.

 Flowering branch with sterile and fertile heads.
  3.

 Pistil.
  5.

 Stipule.
  7.



 APPLE FAMILY.

Trees or shrubs; leaves simple or pinnate, mostly alternate, with
regular, perfect; calyx 5-lobed; calyx-tube adnate to ovary; petals 5,
distinct, inserted with the petals; carpels of the ovary 1-5, partially
1-5; fruit a fleshy pome, often berry-like or drupe-like, formed by


 MALUS.
 CRATÆGUS.

=Pyrus Americana, DC.

_
MOUNTAIN ASH.

=--River banks, cool woods, swamps, and mountains.


Maine,--common; New Hampshire,--common along the watersheds of the
mountains; Vermont,--abundant far up the slopes of the Green mountains;
regions; rare eastward; Rhode Island and Connecticut,--occasional in the

     South, in cold swamps and along the mountains to North Carolina;

=Habit.
northern Maine and on the slopes of the White mountains a height of
extreme altitudes to a low shrub; head, in open ground, pyramidal or

=Bark.
 sambucifolia_.

,=--Buds more or less scythe-shaped, acute,
 Leaves pinnately compound, alternate; stem grooved,
11-19, 2-4 inches long, bright green above, paler beneath, smooth,
sharply serrate above the base; apex acuminate; base roundish to acute

=Inflorescence.
cymes; calyx 5-lobed; petals 5, white, roundish, short-clawed; stamens

=Fruit.
winter.

=--Hardy throughout New England; prefers a good,
 It is readily
of low trees, and in seaside exposures.
sale by collectors.


[Illustration: PLATE LVII.
]
  1.

 Flowering branch.
  3.

 Petal.
  5.


 & Schlecht.

_
MOUNTAIN ASH.

=--Mountain slopes, cool woods, along the shores of
 Americana_, but climbing

From Labrador and Nova Scotia west to the Rocky mountains, then

Maine,--abundant in Aroostook county, Piscataquis county, Somerset
about the Rangeley lakes and locally on Mount Desert Island; New
 Mansfield,
states; to be looked for along the edges of deep, cool swamps and at

     South of New England, probably only as an escape from cultivation;
     thence northward along the mountain ranges to Alaska and south to

=Habit.
15-25 feet, reaching its maximum in northern New England, where it
inches.
resembling the preceding species in the color of bark, in foliage and
 Whether these are two distinct species is at the present
sometimes furnishes specimens that would indubitably be referred to

=Bark.
into small scales curling up on one side; large limbs light-colored,
and leaf-scars; season's shoots light brown, smooth, silvery dotted.

=--Terminal bud 1 inch long, lateral 1/2 inch,

enlarged at base; stipules deciduous; leaflets 7-15, the odd one
beneath, smooth, mostly ovate-oblong, serrate above the base; apex
acuminate; base inequilateral.

=--In broad, compound cymes at the ends of the branches;
 Americanus_; calyx
3-styled.

=--In broad cymes; berries bright red, roundish, rather larger
 Americana_, holding on till winter.

=--Hardy in New England, though of shrub-like
inland, and along the seashore.
showy fruit give it an especial value in artificial plantations; but it
 It

=Note.
 aucuparia_, the leaves have a
and have a more decided tendency to double serration.

--Pyrus sambucifolia.

 Winter buds.
  2.

 Flower with part of perianth and stamens removed.
  4.


=
PEAR TREE.

cultivation throughout New England and elsewhere; becomes scraggly and


=
_Malus Malus, Britton_.


The common apple; introduced from Europe; a more or less frequent escape
wild state to reversion.

=Amelanchier Canadensis, Medic.

 JUNE-BERRY.

=--Dry, open woods, hillsides.


New England,--throughout.

     Louisiana.

=--Shrub or small tree, 10-25 feet high, with a trunk diameter of
of 18 inches; head rather wide-spreading, slender-branched, open;
profuse display of loose spreading clusters of white flowers, and the

=Bark.
purplish-brown, smooth.

=--Buds small, oblong-conical, pointed.
2-3-1/2 inches long, about half as wide, slightly pubescent when young,
from ovate to obovate, finely and sharply serrate; apex pointed or
leafstalk about 1 inch long; stipules slender, silky, ciliate, soon

=Inflorescence.
 Appearing with the leaves at the end of
racemes; flowers large; calyx 5-cleft, campanulate, pubescent to nearly
narrow-oblong or oblong-spatulate, about 1 inch long, two to three times
5-parted.

=--June to July.
various colors to reddish, purplish, or black purple, long-stemmed,

=Horticultural Value.
and situations except in wet lands, but prefers deep, rich, moist loam;
other times a slender, unsymmetrical tree, and again a symmetrical tree
 Its beautiful flowers, clean growth, attractive
plantations where it can be grouped with other trees.
nurseries; procurable from collectors.

--Amelanchier Canadensis.

 Winter buds.
  2.

 Flower with part of perianth and stamens removed.
  4.



A revision of genus _Cratægus_ has long been a desideratum with
 The present year has added numerous new species, most of
to note more carefully the limits of variation in previously existing
 During the present period of
manuals until their status has been satisfactorily established by
areas.

=Cratægus Crus-Galli, L.


Rich soils, edge of swamps.


Found sparingly in western Vermont (_Flora of Vermont_, 1900); southern
 H.

     South to Georgia; west to Iowa.

best distinguished by its thorns and leaves.

smooth, dark green, shining on the upper surface, pale beneath, turning
entire or nearly so near base; apex acute or rounded; base decidedly

Fruit globose or very slightly pear-shaped, remaining on the tree

Hardy throughout southern New England; used frequently for a hedge


=
Thickets, hillsides, borders of forests.


Small tree, common in Vermont (Brainerd) and occasional in the other New

     South to Georgia.

smooth on the upper surface, finally smooth and dull beneath; outline
short-pointed or somewhat obtuse at the apex, wedge-shaped at base;
large, red or yellow.

=Cratægus coccinea, L.

inflorescence, and fruit of plants that have all passed in this country
 coccinea_, and in view of the further uncertainty as to the plant
the specimen in the Linnæan herbarium as the type of _C.
can be described as follows:
     "Leaves elliptical or on vigorous shoots mostly semiorbicular,
     coarsely glandular-serrate lobes, cuneate and finely
     the base, with slender midribs and remote primary veins arcuate
     membranaceous, coated on the upper surface and along the upper
     maturity thick, coriaceous, dark green and lustrous on the upper
     inches long and 1-1-1/2 inches wide, with slender glandular
     often dark red toward the base, and like the young branchlets
     conspicuously glandular-serrate with dark red glands, 1/2-3/4 inch
 Flowers 1/2-3/4 inch in diameter when fully expanded, in
     bractlets linear-lanceolate, coarsely glandular-serrate, caducous;
     glabrous or tomentose, persistent, wide-spreading or erect on the
     styles 3 or 4.
     broad, dark crimson, marked with scattered dark dots, about 1/2
     4, about 1/4 inch long, conspicuously ridged on the back with high

     "A low, bushy tree, occasionally 20 feet in height with a short
     forming wide dense thickets, and with stout more or less zigzag
     year, ashy-gray during their second season and armed with many
     long.
 Fruit ripens and falls toward the end of

     "Slopes of hills and the high banks of salt marshes usually in
     Robinson, 1900; Gerrish island, Maine, J.
 Jack, 1899-1900;
 C.
     Waghorne, 1894.

 C.
 Sargent in _Bot.
_, XXXI, 12.
of the publishers.

=Cratægus mollis, Scheele.

 Cratægus coccinea,_ var.
 & G.


=Habitat and Range.

     Provinces of Quebec and Ontario.

the Piscataquis, and Orono on the lower Penobscot; reported also from
eastern part infrequent; no stations reported in the other New England

     South to Pennsylvania, Louisiana, and Texas; west to Michigan and

=Habit.
inches in diameter, often with numerous suckers; branches at 4-6 feet
or declining; head spreading, widest at base, spray short, angular, and

=Bark.
on the trunk and larger branches separating lengthwise into thin narrow
reddish or yellowish-brown, glossy.

=--Buds small, ovate, reddish-brown, shining;
 Leaves simple, alternate, 3-5 inches
broad-elliptical; rather regularly and slightly incised with fine,
subcordate; roughish above and slightly pubescent beneath, especially
glandular-edged, deciduous.

=--May to June.
flowers white, 3/4 inch broad, ill-smelling; calyx lobes 5, often
flower stems pubescent; bracts glandular.

=--A drupe-like pome, 1/2-1 inch long, bright scarlet, larger
September.

=--Hardy in New England.
tree in low plantations; rarely for sale by nurserymen or collectors;

[Illustration: PLATE LX.
]
  1.

 Branch with thorns.
  3.

 Flower with part of perianth and stamens removed.
  5.

     =Note.
     _Cratægus mollis_ have been referred by Prof.
 S.
     _Cratægus submollis_ (_Bot.
, XXXI, 7, 1901).
     differs from the true _Cratægus mollis_ in its smaller ovate leaves
     number of its stamens, usually 10, and in its pear-shaped

     It is also probable that _C.
     been collected in Massachusetts as _C.
 It differs from _C.
     submollis_ "in its broader, darker green, more villose leaves which
     flowers, subglobose, not oblong or pear-shaped, crimson fruit with
     ripening two or three weeks earlier, and by its much more zigzag
     noticeable in winter, when it may readily be recognized from all
"--C.
 Sargent in _Bot.
_, XXXI, 223, 1901.


DRUPACEÆ.


several species abounding in prussic acid; leaves simple, alternate,
to several glands; flowers in umbels, racemes, or solitary, regular;
calyx; stamens indefinite, distinct, inserted with the petals; pistil 1,


=
_Prunus Americana_, var.
_
WILD PLUM.
 HORSE PLUM.

=Habitat and Range.
spontaneous around dwellings and along fences.

 Lawrence to Lake

Maine,--abundant in the northern sections and common throughout; New
Massachusetts,--occasional; Rhode Island and Connecticut,--not reported.


=Habit.
diameter; branches stout, ascending, somewhat angular, with short, rigid

=Bark.
trees separating into large plates; smaller branches dark brown,

=Winter Buds and Leaves.

Leaves 3-5 inches long, light green on the upper side, paler beneath,
crenulate-serrate; teeth not bristle-tipped; apex abruptly acuminate;
short petiole more or less red-glandular near the blade; stipules

=Inflorescence.
2-3-flowered, slender-stemmed umbels; flowers about an inch broad, white
obovate-oblong, contracting to a claw; stamens numerous; style 1, stigma

=Fruit.
orange-red, skin tough, flesh adherent to the flat stone and pleasant to
 The fruit toward the southern limit of the species is often
forms.

=--Hardy throughout New England, and will grow,
 It has a tendency to
their early spring flowers and handsome autumn leaves.

--Prunus nigra.

 Winter buds.
  2.

 Flower with petals removed.
  4.

 Fruiting branch.
  6.


=
A rare plant in New England, scarcely attaining tree-form.
northern station yet reported is along the slopes of Graylock,

 Churchill).
Southington, shrubs, and small trees 10-15 feet high (C.
 Bissell _in
_, 1900); New Milford and Munroe, small trees (C.
 Averill).

 nigra_ by its sharply toothed leaves, smaller
fruit.

--Prunus Americana.

 Winter buds.
  2.

 Flower with part of perianth and stamens removed.
  4.

 Flowering branch.
  6.

=Prunus Pennsylvanica, L.
=
 RED CHERRY.
 PIGEON CHERRY.

=Habitat and Range.
occasional in rather low grounds.

     the Coast Range.

as 4500 feet upon Katahdin, less common southward and near the seacoast.


=Habit=.
inches in diameter, erect; branches at an angle of 45° or less; head
long-stemmed white flowers, and in autumn by a profusion of small red

=Bark.
conspicuously marked with coarse horizontal lines; the outer layer
young trees very smooth and shining throughout; lines very conspicuous
lines; spray and season's shoots polished red, with minute orange dots.

=--Buds small, broad-conical, acute.
numerous, 3-4 inches long, 1-2 inches wide, light green and shining on
serrate; teeth sharp-pointed, sometimes incurved; apex acuminate; base
stipules falling early.

=--June.
the flowers on long, slender, somewhat branching stems; calyx 5-cleft;
numerous; pistil 1; style 1.

=--About the size of a pea, round, light red, thin-meated and

=Horticultural Value.
gravelly loam, but grows in poor soils and exposed situations; habit so
it in ornamental plantations; sometimes very useful in sterile land.
variety with transparent yellowish fruit is occasionally met with, but

[Illustration: PLATE LXIII.
]
  1.

 Flowering branch.
  3.

 Petal.
  5.


=
CHOKECHERRY.

=--In varying soils; along river banks, on dry

     From Newfoundland across the continent, as far north on the

Common throughout New England; at an altitude of 4500 feet upon Mt.
Katahdin.


=Habit.
feet in height, with a trunk diameter of 5-6 inches; head, in open
attractive in flower and fruit, the latter variable in color and

=Bark.
raised buff-orange spots; branchlets dull grayish or reddish brown;
 Bitter to the taste.

=--Buds 1-1-1/4 inches long, conical,

Leaves 2-5 inches long and two-thirds as wide, dull green on the upper
often doubly serrate; apex abruptly pointed; base roundish, obtuse or
near base of leaf; stipules long, narrow, ciliate, falling when the

=Inflorescence.
 serotina_,
erect or spreading racemes, 2-4 inches long; flowers short-stemmed,
5-cleft with thin reflexed lobes, soon falling; stamens numerous; pistil

=Fruit.
commonly bright red, edible, but more or less astringent; stem somewhat

=Horticultural Value.
any soil, but prefers a deep, rich, moist loam.
attractive, but in New England they soon begin to show dead branches,
not wise to use them in ornamental plantations, or to permit them to

[Illustration: PLATE LXIV.
]
  1.

 Flowering branch.
  3.

 A petal.
  5.


=
RUM CHERRY.

=Habitat and Range.
and rich woods.


Maine,--not reported north of Oldtown (Penobscot county); frequent

     South to Florida; west to North Dakota, Kansas, and Texas,
     America to Peru.

=--Usually a medium-sized tree, 30-50 feet in height, with a
greater dimensions in the middle and southern states; branches few,
the base, rather ungraceful when naked, but very attractive when clothed
flowers, or laden with drooping racemes of handsome black fruit.

=--Bark of trunk deep reddish-brown and smooth in young trees, in
scales; branches dark reddish-brown, marked with small oblong, raised
 Bitter to the taste.

=--Buds ovate, 1/8 inch long, covered with

Leaves 2-5 inches long, about half as wide, dark green above and glossy
pale yellow, firm, smooth on both sides, elliptical, oblong, or
sharp; base acute or roundish; meshes of veins minute; petioles 1/2 inch
stipules glandular-edged, falling as the leaf expands.

=--May to June.
racemes, 4-5 inches long; flowers small; calyx with 5 short teeth
5, spreading, white, obovate; stamens numerous; pistil one; style

=Fruit.
 Somewhat flattened vertically, 1/4 inch in

=Horticultural Value.
situations young trees grow very rapidly, old trees rather slowly.
Seldom used for ornamental purposes, but serves well as a nurse tree for
effect is desired, on inland exposures or near the seacoast.
branches are very liable to disfigurement by the black-knot and the
 Large plants are seldom for sale, but
 A
 Propagated from

[Illustration: PLATE LXV.
]
  1.

 Flowering branch.
  3.

 A petal.
  5.

 Mature leaf.

=Prunus Avium, L.


Introduced from England; occasionally spontaneous along fences and the
 As an escape, 25-50 feet high, with a trunk

inches long; leafstalk about 1/2 inch long, often glandular near base of
fruit dark red, sweet, mostly inferior or blighted.


LEGUMINOSÆ.


=
HONEY LOCUST.

=Habitat and Range.
soils; rich woods, mountain sides, sterile plains.


Maine,--young trees in the southern sections said to have been
 L.
Vermont,--introduced; Massachusetts,--occasional; Rhode
 F.
reported.
England.

     the Alleghanies in Pennsylvania; south to Georgia and Alabama; west
     Michigan to Nebraska, Kansas, Indian territory, and Texas.

=--A medium-sized tree, reaching a height of 40-60 feet and a
the river bottoms of Ohio, Kentucky, and Tennessee; trunk dark and
often horizontal, both trunk and larger branches armed above the axils
thorns, sometimes clustered in forbidding tangles a foot or two in
extremely delicate, fern-like foliage lying in graceful planes or

=Bark.
trees almost to black; yellowish-brown in second year's growth; season's
rough-dotted.

=--Winter buds minute, in clusters of three or
 Leaves compound, once to twice pinnate,
rachis abruptly enlarged at base and covering the winter buds: leaflets
when unfolding, turning to dark green above, slightly lighter beneath,
crenulate-serrate; apex obtuse, scarcely mucronate; base mostly rounded;

=Inflorescence.
 From lateral or terminal buds on the old
among the young leaves; sterile and fertile flowers on different trees
campanulate, 3-5-cleft; petals 3-5, somewhat wider than the sepals, and
abortive or wanting, conspicuous in the fertile flowers.
flower more or less pubescent, arachnoid-pubescent within, near the

=Fruit.
twisted, containing several flat brown seeds.

=--Hardy throughout New England, grows in any
grows rapidly, is long-lived, free from disease, and makes a picturesque
and highly finished grounds on account of the stiff spines, which are a
strap-shaped pods, which litter the ground.
which is better adapted than the type for ornamental purposes.
is sometimes offered in nurseries at a low price by the quantity.
Propagated from seed.

--Gleditsia triacanthos.

 Winter buds.
  2.

 Flowering branch.
  4.

 Flowering branch, flowers mostly fertile.
  6.

 Fruiting branch.
  8.


=
LOCUST.

=--In its native habitat growing upon mountain

     Naturalized from Nova Scotia to Ontario.

Hampshire,--abundant enough to be reckoned among the valuable timber
Rhode Island, and Connecticut,--common in patches and thickets and along

     Native from southern Pennsylvania along the mountains to Georgia;

=Habit.
conditions reaching a height of 50-75 feet; trunk diameter 8 inches to 2
forming a few-branched, spreading top, clothed with a tender green,
pendulous clusters of white fragrant flowers.

=--Bark of trunk dark, rough and seamy even in young trees, and
trees coarsely, deeply, and firmly ridged, not flaky; larger branches a
season's shoots green, more or less rough-dotted, thin, and often

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
the leaf-scar.
the base, covering bud of the next season; often with spines in the
inches long, about half as wide, light green; outline ovate or
truncate, rounded, obtuse or acutish; distinctly short-stalked;

=Inflorescence.
 Showy and abundant, in loose,
upper segments mostly coherent; corolla shaped like a pea blossom, the
simple.

=--A smooth, dark brown, flat pod, about 3 inches long,
throughout the winter.

=--Hardy throughout New England in all dry, sunny
short-lived and subject to serious injury by the attacks of borers.
Occasionally procurable in large quantities at a low rate.
there are many horticultural forms, a few of which are occasionally
 The type is propagated from seed, the

[Illustration: PLATE LXVII.
]
  1.

 Flowering branch.
  3.

 Fruiting branch.

=Robinia viscosa, Vent.


This tree appears to be sparingly established in southern Canada and at

Common in cultivation and occasionally established through the middle
South Carolina, and Georgia.

 Pseudacacia_ by its smaller size,
more compact, usually upright, scarcely fragrant, rose-colored



 AILANTHUS FAMILY.

=Ailanthus glandulosus, Desf.

 TREE-OF-HEAVEN.

Sparsely and locally naturalized in southern Ontario, New England, and

A native of China; first introduced into the United States on an
disseminated by nursery plants and by seed distributed from the
 Its rapid growth, ability to
foliage made it a great favorite for shade and ornament.
extensively in Philadelphia and New York, and generally throughout the
 When these trees began to fill the
balmy air of June and the water in the cisterns, occasioning many
were cut down.
objection lay, were allowed to grow, and have often attained a height of
 The fruit is very
greenish keys.

often 2-3 feet long, by the numerous leaflets, sometimes exceeding 40,
its vigorous growth from suckers, and in winter by the coarse, blunt



 SUMAC FAMILY.

=Rhus typhina, L.

_
STAGHORN SUMAC.

=--In widely varying soils and localities; river
places generally, often forming copses.


Common throughout New England.


=Habit.
trunk 8-10 inches in diameter; branches straggling, thickish, mostly
several inches by the frost; head very open, irregular, characterized by
rich yellows and reds, and by its beautiful, soft-looking crimson cones.

=--Bark of trunk light brown, mottled with gray, becoming dark
shoots densely covered with velvety hairs, like the young horns of deer
or three years; the extremities dotted with minute orange spots which
the branches.

=--Buds roundish, obtuse, densely covered with
 Leaves pinnately compound,
axillary bud; leaflets 11-31, mostly in opposite pairs, the middle pair
above, light and often downy beneath; outline narrow to broad-oblong or
slightly heart-shaped or rounded at base; stipules none.

=--June to July.
panicles, often a foot in length and 5-6 inches wide; sterile and
occasionally on the same tree; calyx small, the 5 hairy,
about half the length of the usually recurved petals; stamens 5,
sepals are nearly as long as the upright petals; stamens short; ovary

=Fruit.
of small, dryish, smooth-stoned drupes densely covered with acid,

=Horticultural Value.
 Grows in any
 The vigorous growth,
landscape plantations.
becoming in a few years the center of a broad-spreading group.
obtainable in nurseries, but collected plants transplant easily.

exceedingly graceful and delicate foliage.

--Rhus typhina.

 Winter buds.
  2.

 Staminate flower.
  4.

 Pistillate flower.
  6.

 Fruit.

=Rhus Vernix, L.

_
DOGWOOD.
 POISON ELDER.

=--Low grounds and swamps; occasional on the moist

     Infrequent in Ontario.

far north as Chesterville (Franklin county); Vermont,--infrequent;
seacoast.


=Habit.
sometimes 8-10 inches in diameter; broad-topped in the open along the
diffusely panicled, pale, yellowish-white fruit.

=--Trunk and branches mottled gray, roughish with round spots;
to gray, thickly beset with rough yellowish warts; leaf-scars prominent,

=Buds and Leaves.
 Leaves pinnately compound,
short-stalked except the odd one, 2-3 inches long, 1-2 inches wide,
and often dull, obovate to oval or ovate; entire, often wavy-margined;
prominent, often red; stipules none.

=--Early in July.
loose, axillary clusters of small greenish flowers; sterile, fertile,
fertile on separate trees; calyx deeply 5-parted, divisions ovate,
ovary globose, styles 3.

=--Drupes about as large as peas, smooth, more or less glossy,


=Horticultural Value.
this, does so well in wet ground; it grows also in any good soil, but it
 It

=Note.
New England plants.
source of grief to collectors.
actual contact, by the exhalation of vapor from the leaves, by grains of

It is easily distinguished from the other sumacs.
toothed like those of _R.
 glabra_
 typhina_ and _R.
(dwarf sumac); the rachis of the compound leaf is not wing-margined as
 copallina_; the panicles of flower and fruit are not upright and
dense crimson hairs, but is smooth and whitish.
it grows for the most part in lowlands and swamps.

is occasionally found with a trunk 5 or 6 inches in diameter (C.


[Illustration: PLATE LXIX.
]
  1.

 Branch with sterile flowers.
  3.

 Branch with fertile flowers.
  5.

 Fruiting branch.


AQUIFOLIACEÆ.


=
HOLLY.

=Habitat and Range.
in sandy loam or in low, moist soil in the vicinity of water.

various botanical works, but no station is known; New Hampshire and
southward upon the mainland and the island of Naushon; rare in the peat
Compton and sparingly found upon Prudence and Conanicut islands in
sections.

     eastern Texas.

=--A shrub or small tree, exceptionally reaching a height of 30
proportions south and west; head conical or dome-shaped, compact;
foliage.
and early winter by the conspicuous red berries.

=--Bark of trunk thick, smooth on young trees, roughish, dotted on
shoots more or less downy, bright greenish-yellow, becoming smooth and

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
scales minutely ciliate.
long, 1-1/2-3 inches wide, flat when compared with those of the European
on the upper surface, paler beneath, elliptical, oval or oval-oblong;
concave between the large spiny teeth, sometimes with one or two teeth
minute, awl-shaped, becoming blackish, persistent.

=--Flowers in June along the base of the season's shoots;
loose, few-flowered clusters, the fertile mostly solitary; peduncles and
ciliate teeth; corolla white, monopetalous, with 4 roundish, oblong
corolla in the fertile flowers, but longer in the sterile; ovary green,
 Parts of

=Fruit.
grooved on the convex back, ripening late, and persistent into winter.
yellow-fruited form reported at New Bedford, Mass.

=Horticultural Value.
moist, gravelly loam, it does fairly well in dry soil; of slow growth;
woods; occasionally sold by collectors but rare in nurseries; nursery
small percentage of ordinary collected plants live.
germinates in less than two years.

=--The cultivated European holly, which the American tree closely
wave-margined leaves and the deeper red of its berries.

Col.
, which are about a foot in
 They have
"--D.


This estate is now owned by Mr.
 Watson.
trees have been cut down, but one of them is still standing and of
 It must have reached the limit
decrepitude.
more of bark from the trunk.

--Ilex opaca.

 Branch with staminate flowers.
  2.

 Pistillate flower.
  4.



 MAPLE FAMILY.

=Acer rubrum, L.

 SWAMP MAPLE.
 WHITE MAPLE.

=--Borders of streams, low lands, wet forests,

     Nova Scotia to the Lake of the Woods.

on Katahdin.


=Habit.
swamps to a height of 60-75 feet; trunk 2-4 feet in diameter, throwing
branchlets slender, forming a bushy spray, the tips having a slightly
symmetrical, widest just above the point of furcation.
days of spring there shimmers amid the naked branches a faint glow of
or yellow of the long flowering stems; succeeded later by the brilliant
pales and falls in June.
splendor with those of the sugar maple.

=--In young trees smooth and light gray, becoming very dark and
old trees hanging in long flakes; young shoots often bright red in

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
preceding year's shoots, about 1/8 inch long; protected by dark reddish
 Leaves
more or less pubescent beneath, especially along the veins; turning
generally the longest, the lower pair (when 5 lobes are present) the
acute; base heart-shaped, truncate, or obtuse; leafstalk 1-3 inches
 The leaves of the red maple vary greatly in size, outline, lobing,

=Inflorescence.
 Appearing before the leaves in close
from dull red or pale yellow to scarlet; the sterile and fertile flowers
frequently on different trees; calyx lobes oblong and obtuse; petals
in the sterile and about the same length in the fertile flowers; the
stigmatic lobes.

=--Fruit ripe in June, hanging on long stems, varying from brown
maturity more or less divergent.

=--Hardy throughout New England; found in a wider
prefer a gravelly or peaty loam in positions where its roots can reach a
 It is more variable than any other of the
a symmetrical outline and uniform habit are required.
transplanted readily, but recovers its vigor more slowly than does the
 Its variable

[Illustration: PLATE LXXI.
]
  1.

 Flower-buds.
  3.

 Sterile flower.
  5.

 Fertile flower.
  7.

 Variant leaves.

=Acer saccharinum, L.

_
SILVER MAPLE.
 WHITE MAPLE.

=Habitat and Range.
moist, deep-soiled forests, but not in swamps.

     throughout Ontario.

developed upon the banks of rivers and lakes at low altitudes.

     Indian territory; attaining its maximum size in the basins of the
     whole range.

=--A handsome tree, 50-60 feet in height; trunk 2-5 feet in
slightly diverging branches.
subdivide at wider angles, forming a very wide head, much broader near
 The ultimate branches are long and slender, often forming on

its flower-buds conspicuously scattered along the tips of the
cut leaves.
preceding the red maple by one to three weeks.

=--Bark of trunk smooth and gray in young trees, becoming with age
scales; young shoots chestnut-colored in autumn, smooth, polished,

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
branchlets, conspicuous in winter; scales imbricated, convex, polished,
long, with similar scales, the inner lengthening, falling as the leaf
 Leaves simple, opposite, 3-5 inches long, of varying width,
lobes 3, or more usually 5, deeply cut, sharp-toothed, sharp-pointed,
sub-heart-shaped or truncate; stems long.

=--March to April.
branchlets of the previous year, in simple, crowded umbels; flowers
sometimes on different trees, generally in separate clusters,
in bud-scales; petals none; sterile flowers long, stamens 3-7 much
broad, stamens about the length of calyx-tube, ovary woolly, with two

=Fruit.
 Keys
scythe-shaped or straight, yellowish-green, one key often aborted.

=--Hardy in cultivation throughout New England.
grace of its branches, the beauty of its foliage, and its rapid growth
 It attains its finest development
water, but it grows well in any good soil.
readily obtainable at a low price than any other tree in general use for
 The branches are easily broken by wind
its fertility.

--Acer saccharinum.

 Leaf-buds.
  2.

 Branch with sterile flowers.
  4.

 Branch with sterile and fertile flowers.
  6.

 Fertile flower.
  8.

 Fruiting branch.

=Acer Saccharum, Marsh.

_ _Acer barbatum, Michx.

 SUGAR MAPLE.
 SUGAR TREE.

=--Rich woods and cool, rocky slopes.


New England,--abundant, distributed throughout the woods, often forming
in the mountainous portions of New Hampshire and Vermont, and in the

     South to the Gulf states; west to Minnesota, Nebraska, Kansas, and

=Habit.
diameter, stout, erect, throwing out its primary branches at acute
declining at the base, leaving the stem higher up at sharper and sharper
of nearly uniform length; head symmetrical, varying greatly in shape; in
egg-shaped with age; clothed with dense masses of foliage, purple-tinged
the forest, with the possible exception of the red maple, in its

=Bark.
and firm in young trees, in old trees becoming deeply furrowed, often
shoots at length of a shining reddish-brown, smooth, numerously

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
pubescent, terminal 1/4 inch long, lateral 1/8 inch, appressed, the
 Leaves simple,
more or less pubescent when opening, at maturity dark green above,
and yellows in autumn; lobes sometimes 3, usually 5, acuminate,
subcordate, truncate, or wedge-shaped; veins and veinlets conspicuous

=Inflorescence.
 Appearing with the leaves in nearly
greenish-yellow, pendent on long thread-like, hairy stems; sterile and
infrequently in the same cluster; the 5-lobed calyx cylindrical or
longer than the calyx, in fertile scarcely exserted; ovary smooth,
with two divergent, thread-like, stigmatic lobes.

=--Keys usually an inch or more in length, glabrous, wings broad,

=Horticultural Value.
 Its long life,
growth, usual freedom from disease or insect disfigurement, and
favorite in cultivation; readily obtainable in nurseries, transplants
growth.

=--Not liable to be taken for any other native maple, but
platanoides_, from which it is easily distinguished by the milky juice

The leaves of the Norway maple are thinner, bright green and glabrous

[Illustration: PLATE LXXIII.
]
  1.

 Flowering branch.
  3.

 Fertile flower, part of perianth and stamens removed.
  5.


, var.
=
_Acer nigrum, Michx.
 _nigrum, T.
 Acer
 _nigrum, Sarg.


=Habitat and Range.
least, the sugar maple is rarely if ever seen, or upon moist, rocky

     Apparently a common tree from Ottawa westward throughout Ontario.

Champlain valley, appear to be dubious intermediates between the type

Maine,--the Rangeley lake region; New Hampshire,--occasional near the
Champlain valley, occasional in all other sections, especially in the
Connecticut river valley and westward, doubtfully reported from eastern
Olney's list; Connecticut,--doubtfully reported.

     meridian.

there are few, if any, constant characters.
field is necessary to determine the status of these interesting plants.

=--The black maple is somewhat smaller than the sugar maple, the
 It generally has a

=Leaves.
type, darker green above, edges sometimes drooping, width equal to or
entire, the two lower lobes small, often reduced to a curve in the
the lengthening scales of the opening leaves, the young shoots, the
densely woolly pubescence.
disappears, except along the midrib and principal veins, which become

=Horticultural Value.
moist, fertile, gravelly loam; young trees are rather more vigorous than
 Difficult to secure,
occasionally found mixed with the sugar maple in nursery rows.

--Acer Saccharum, var.
]
  1.


=
MOUNTAIN MAPLE.

=--In damp forests, rocky highland woods, along the

     From Nova Scotia and Newfoundland to Saskatchewan.

Vermont,--common; Massachusetts,--rather common in western and central
Connecticut,--occasional in northern and central sections; reported as

     Along mountain ranges to Georgia.

=--Mostly a shrub, but occasionally attaining a height of 25
a short, straight trunk and slender branches; bright green foliage
delicate flowers, drooping at length beneath the weight of the maturing

=Bark.
gray; branchlets reddish-brown streaked with green, retaining in the
reddish on the upper side when exposed to the sun, minutely pubescent.

=--Buds small, flattish, acute, slightly
 Leaves simple, opposite, 4-5 inches long,
glabrous on the upper surface, 3-lobed above the center, often with two
acuminate; base more or less heart-shaped; veining 3-5-nerved,
long, enlarged at the base.

=--June.
long-stemmed, terminal, more or less panicled, erect or slightly
raceme, the fertile near the base; all upon very slender pedicels; lobes
linear petals; stamens usually 8, in the sterile flower nearly as long
the sterile flower; in the fertile the ovary is surmounted by an erect

=Fruit.
smaller than those of any other American maple, set on hair-like
a small cavity upon one side.

=--Hardy in cultivation throughout New England;
well in any good soil; easily transplanted, but recovers its vigor

Seldom grown in nurseries, but readily obtainable from northern

[Illustration: PLATE LXXV.
]
  1.

 Flowering branch.
  3.

 Abortive ovary in sterile flower.
  5.

 Fruiting branch.

=Acer Pennsylvanicum, L.

 MOOSEWOOD.

=Habitat and Range.

     Nova Scotia to Lake Superior.

Vermont,--common in highland woods; Massachusetts,--common in the
Island,--frequent northward; Connecticut,--frequent, reported as far

     South on shaded mountain slopes and in deep ravines to Georgia;

=Habit.
ground of 5-8 inches; characterized by a slender, beautifully striate
foliage, deepening later to a yellowish-green; and by the long,
abundant, drooping fruit.

=--Bark of trunk and branches deep reddish-brown or dark green,
roughish with light buff, irregular dots; the younger branches marked
season's shoots smooth, light green, mottled with black.

rise to the name "whistle wood.

=--Terminal bud long, short-stalked, obscurely
foliage roseate.
broad; the upper leaves much narrower; when fully grown light green
above the center into three deep acuminate lobes, finely, sharply, and
leafstalks 1-3 inches long, grooved, the enlarged base including the

=Inflorescence.
appearing after the leaves in late May or early June; the sterile and
bell-shaped flowers on slender pedicels; petals and sepals
obovate petals; stamens usually 8, shorter than the petals in the
in the sterile flower, in the fertile terminating in a recurved

=Fruit.
but not uniform angle; distinguished from the other maples, except _A.
spicatum_, by a small cavity in the side of each key; abundant; ripening

=Horticultural Value.
New England.
well in almost any soil when once established, many young plants failing
 Occasionally grown by nurserymen, but

[Illustration: PLATE LXXVI.
]
  1.

 Flowering branch.
  3.

 Fertile flower with part of the perianth removed.
  5.


=
_Negundo aceroides, Moench.
_
BOX ELDER.

=Habitat and Range.
swamps.

     Manitoba westward to the Rocky mountains south of 55° north

Maine,--along the St.
villages, the commonest roadside tree, brought in from the wild state
originating from planted specimens, in various parts of the state; New
extending northward as far as South Charlestown (W.
 Flint _in lit.
Vermont,--shores of the Winooski river and of Lake Champlain;
Bridge, and Lime Rock station.

     reaching its greatest size in the river bottoms of the Ohio and its

=Habit.
1-2 feet.
from the ground, into several wide-spreading branches, forming a broad,
foliage, delicate flowers and abundant, long, loose racemes of
throughout the winter.

=--Bark of trunk when young, smooth, yellowish-green, in old trees
season's shoots pale green or sometimes reddish-purple, smooth and

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
minutely pubescent scales.
usually 3, sometimes 5 or 7, 2-4 inches long, 1-1/2-2-1/2 inches broad,
pubescent at maturity, ovate or oval, irregularly and remotely
acute; base extremely variable; veins prominent; petioles 2-3 inches
leaf-scars which unite at an angle midway between the winter buds.

=--April 1-15.
preceding year's shoots as the leaf-buds begin to open, small,
clusters, on long, hairy, drooping, thread-like stems; the calyx hairy,
pistil none: the fertile in delicate, pendent racemes, scarcely
out of the calyx; styles long, divergent; stamens none.

=--Loose, pendent, greenish-yellow racemes, 6-8 inches long, the
somewhat wavy near the extremity, dropping in late autumn from the

=Horticultural Value.
moist soil near running water or on rocky slopes, but accommodates
 Plants of the same
for street planting.

fall.
some of which are occasionally offered in nurseries.
having the new growth covered with a glaucous bloom, is said to be

[Illustration: PLATE LXXVII.
]
  1.

 Branch with sterile flowers.
  3.

 Branch with fertile flowers.
  5.

 Fruiting branch.


TILIACEÆ.


=
BASSWOOD.
 LIME.

=Habitat and Range.

     Southern Canada from New Brunswick to Lake Winnipeg.

feet; rare from 1000 to 2000 feet.

     Texas.

=--A large tree, 5O-75 feet high, rising in the upper valley of
diameter, erect, diminishing but slightly to the branching point; head,
symmetrical; branches mostly straight, striking out in different trees
slender, often drooping at the extremities, repeatedly subdividing,
 Foliage very abundant, green
flowers in numerous clusters; the pale, odd-shaped bracts and pea-like

=Bark.
broadly and firmly ridged; in old trees irregularly furrowed; branches,
shoots yellowish-green to reddish-brown, and numerously rough-dotted.
The inner bark is fibrous and tough.

=--Leaf-buds small, conical, brownish red,
 Leaves simple, alternate, 4-5
thickish, paler beneath, broad-ovate, one-sided, serrate, the point
midrib and veins conspicuous on the under surface with minute, reddish
soon falling.

=--Late June or early July.
drooping cymes, the peduncle attached about half its length to a
and tapering slightly at the base, pedicels slender; calyx of 5 colored
sepals, often obscurely toothed at the apex; 5 petal-like scales in
yellowish-white; stamens indefinite, mostly in clusters inserted with

=Fruit.
by abortion: 1-2 seeds.

=--Useful as an ornamental or street tree; hardy
any well-drained soil; comes into leaf late and drops its foliage in
 The European species are more common in nurseries.
however, seriously affected by wood borers, while the native tree has
 Usually propagated from the seed.
horticultural form with weeping branches is sometimes cultivated.

=--There is so close a resemblance between the lindens that it is
their European relatives.


_, is distinguished from _Americana_ by its

_Tilia heterophylla, Vent.
white under-surface of the leaves.

indiscriminately known in nurseries as _Tilia Europæa_.
easily distinguished from the American species by the absence of

[Illustration: PLATE LXXVIII.
]

 Winter buds.
  2.

 Flower enlarged.
  4.

 Fruiting branch.


CORNACEÆ.


=
FLOWERING DOGWOOD.

=Habitat and Range.
ridges.


Maine,--Fayette Ridge, Kennebec county; New Hampshire,--along the
than its junction with the West river; Vermont,--southern and
state, common in the Connecticut river valley, frequent eastward; Rhode

     South to Florida; west to Minnesota and Texas.

=--A small tree, 15-30 feet high, with a trunk diameter of 6-10
 The spreading branches form an open, roundish head, the young
 In spring, when decked with
of the forest; in autumn, scarcely less beautiful in the rich reds of

=Bark.
often separating into small, firm, 4-angled or roundish plates; branches
downy; taste bitter.

=--Terminal leaf-buds narrowly conical, acute;
 Leaves simple,
beneath, turning to reds, purples, and yellows in the autumn, ovate to
apex pointed; base acutish; veins distinctly indented above, ribs

=Inflorescence.
 Appearing with the unfolding leaves in
a very conspicuous 4-leafed involucre (often mistaken for the corolla
white or pinkish, 1-1/2 inches long, obovate, curiously notched at the
 The real flowers are insignificant, suggesting the tubular
surmounting it by 4 small teeth; petals greenish-yellow, oblong,

=Fruit.
clusters, persistent till late autumn or till eaten by the birds.

=--Hardy in southern and southern-central New
as the surface of the snow; not only one of the most attractive small
useful for shady places or under tall trees.
red-flowering and also a weeping variety are obtainable in leading
 Collected plants can be made to succeed.
rather slow growth.

--Cornus florida.

 Leaf-buds.
  2.

 Flowering branch.
  4.

 Fruiting branch.

=Cornus alternifolia, L.
=
DOGWOOD.

=Habitat and Range.
streams and swamps.

 Lawrence

Common throughout New England.


=Habit.
inches; head usually widest near the top, flat; branches nearly
broad planes.

=--Trunk and larger branches greenish, warty, streaked with gray;

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
 Leaves simple, alternate
inches long, dark green on the upper side, paler beneath, with minute
long-pointed; base acutish or rounded; veins indented above, ribs

=Inflorescence.
 From shoots of the season, in irregular open
corolla white or pale yellow, with the 4 oblong petals at length

=Fruit.
 Globular, blue or blue black, on slender, reddish

=Horticultural Value.
a great variety of situations, but preferring a soil that is constantly
 Nursery or good collected plants are easily transplanted.
disease, similar in its effect to the pear blight, so often disfigures

[Illustration: PLATE LXXX.
]
  1.

 Flowering branch.
  3.

 Flower, view from above.
  5.


=
TUPELO.
 PEPPERIDGE.

=--In rich, moist soil, in swamps and on the borders

     Ontario.

yet reported (Dr.
common in the Merrimac valley, seldom seen north of the White
and Connecticut,--rather common.


=Habit.
rising in the forest to the height of 60-80 feet; attaining greater
touching the ground at their tips, the upper horizontal or slightly
and stiff, making a flat spray; head extremely variable, unique in
somewhat rounded; often reduced in Nantucket and upon the southern shore
low, dense, tangled thickets.
green, turning early in the fall to a brilliant crimson.

=--Trunk of young trees grayish-white, with irregular and shallow
lozenge-shaped scales; branches smooth and brown; season's shoots

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
 Leaves
at the ends of the shoots, 2-5 inches long, one-half as wide; at first
above, paler beneath, obovate or oblanceolate to oval; entire, few or
abruptly acute; base acutish; firm, smooth, finely sub-veined; stem
none.

=--May or early June.
axillary clusters of small greenish flowers, sterile and fertile usually
simple or compound clusters; calyx minutely 5-parted, petals 5, small or
fertile flowers larger, solitary, or several sessile in a bracted

=Fruit.
sour: stone striated lengthwise.

=--Hardy throughout New England; adapts itself
 Seldom
root-pruned or moved; collected plants do not thrive well; seedlings are
 Few trees are of greater ornamental

[Illustration: PLATE LXXXI.
]
  1.

 Branch with sterile flowers.
  3-4.

 Branch with fertile flowers.
  6.

 Fruiting branch.


EBENACEÆ.


=
PERSIMMON.

=--Rhode Island,--occasional but doubtfully native;
boundary line, there is a grove consisting of about one hundred
edge, in sandy soil just above the beach grass, exposed to the
up around them during the heavy winter storms.
thriving condition; several are dead or dying, and no new plants are
 A cross-section of the trunk of a
rings.
 This
ground where they stand was grassy and fertile.
at that time, must assuredly have been in their infancy.
encroachment of the sea and subsequent change of conditions account well
and apparent age point rather to introduction than native growth.

     Texas.

=--One of the Rhode Island trees measured 3 feet 11 inches girth

 Russell).
trunk diameter of 6-10 inches, trunk and limbs much twisted by the
 Their branches, beginning to put out at a height of 6-8 feet, lie

=Bark.
into small, firm sections; large limbs dark reddish-brown; season's

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
 Leaves simple,
glossy above, somewhat lighter and minutely downy (at least when young)
rounded or truncate; leafstalk short; stipules none.

=--June.
the same trees; not conspicuous, axillary; sterile often in clusters,
long, pale yellow, thickish, urn-shaped, constricted at the mouth and
flowers, in fertile flowers 8 or less, imperfect; styles 4, ovary

=Fruit.
diameter, larger farther south, with thick, spreading, persistent calyx,
agreeable to the taste after exposure to the frost; several-seeded.

=--Hardy along the south shore of New England;
enemies; occasionally cultivated in nurseries but difficult to
 Propagated from seed.

--Diospyros Virginiana.

 Winter buds.
  2.

 Vertical section of sterile flower.
  4.

 Section of fertile flower.
  6.



 OLIVE FAMILY.

Fraxinus Americana, L.


=Habitat and Range.
streams.


Maine,--very common, often forming large forest areas; in the other New
masses.


=Habit.
2-3 feet; rising in the rich bottom lands of the Ohio river 100 feet or
 In open
or three large limbs, and is soon lost amid the slender, often gently
the base, with light and graceful foliage, and a stout, rather sparse,

=Bark.
distance by the characteristic gray color and uniform striation; ridges
transverse seams; furrows fine and strong, sinuous, parallel or
branches smooth and grayish-green; season's shoots polished olive green;

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
pale rusty brown.
petiole smooth and grooved; leaflets 5-9, 2-5 inches long, deep green
young) beneath; ovate to lance-oblong, entire or somewhat toothed; apex
smooth; stipules and stipels none.

=--May.
of the previous season's shoots, sterile and fertile flowers for the
flowers 4-toothed, petals none, stamens 2-4, anthers oblong; calyx in
none, stamens none, pistil 1, style 1, stigma 2-cleft.

=--Ripening in early fall, and hanging in clusters into the
below, dilating from near the tip into a wing two or three times as long

=Horticultural Value.
moist, loamy soil, but grows in any well-drained situation; easily
successfully.
and street plantations, on account of its rapid and clean growth,

desirable to plant with other trees of different habit.
seed.

--Fraxinus Americana.

  1.

 Branch with sterile flowers.
  3.

 Branch with fertile flowers.
  5.

 Fruiting branch.

=Fraxinus Pennsylvanica, Marsh.

_
RED ASH.
 RIVER ASH.

=--River banks, swampy lowlands, margins of streams

     New Brunswick to Manitoba.

as Boscawen in the Merrimac valley; Vermont,--common along Lake
other sections; Massachusetts and Rhode Island,--sparingly scattered
Canaan, and Lisbon (J.
 Bishop).

     Missouri.

=--Medium-sized to large tree, 30-70 feet high, with trunk 1-3
appearance resembling the white ash.

=--Trunk dark gray or brown, smooth in young trees, furrowed in
young shoots greenish-gray with a rusty-velvety or scurfy pubescence

=Winter Buds and Leaves.
less downy, smaller than those of the white ash, partially covered by
 Leaves pinnately compound, opposite, 9-15 inches
3-5 inches long, about one half as wide, light green and smooth above,
narrow-oblong, elliptical or sometimes obovate, entire or slightly
short, grooved, downy; stipules and stipels none.

=--May.

=Fruit.
winter; samara or key about 1-1/2 inches long; body of the fruit
into linear or spatulate wings, obtuse or rounded at the ends, sometimes

=Horticultural Value.
any good soil, but prefers a wet or moist, rich loam; almost as rapid
insects or fungous diseases; worthy of a place in landscape plantations

[Illustration: PLATE LXXXIV.
]
  1.

 Branch with sterile flowers.
  3.

 Branch with fertile flowers.
  5.

 Fruiting branch.
  7.


 lanceolata, Sarg.

 f.
_
GREEN ASH.


     Ontario to Saskatchewan.

Vermont,--along Lake Champlain; Gardner's island, and the north end of
 N.
_Report of Connecticut Board of Agriculture_, 1895).


The claims to specific distinction rest mainly upon the usual absence of
leaves (which is bright green above and scarcely less so beneath), the
acuminate apex.

 pubescens_, connected with it by

[Illustration: PLATE LXXXV.

]
  1.

 Fruiting branch.

=Fraxinus nigra, Marsh.

_
BLACK ASH.
 BASKET ASH.
 BROWN ASH.

=--Wet woods, river bottoms, and swamps.


Maine,--common; New Hampshire,--south of the White mountains;
sections; Rhode Island,--infrequent; Connecticut,--occasional

     South to Delaware and Virginia; west to Arkansas and Missouri.

=--A tall tree reaching a height of 60-80 feet, with a trunk
 In swamps,
scarcely tapering to point of branching, in open situations under
 Easily

=Bark.
ridges separating into fine, thin, close flakes; limbs light gray,
olive green, stout; flattened at apex, with small, black, vertical dots.

=--Buds roundish, pointed, very dark, the
 Leaves compound, opposite, 12-15 inches long;
9, 3-5 inches long, 1-1/2-2 inches wide, green on both sides, lighter
usually oblong-lanceolate, sharply serrate; apex acuminate; base obtuse

=Inflorescence.
 Appearing before the leaves in loose panicles
fertile flowers on different trees; bracted; calyx none; petals none.

=--August to September.
inch long, rounded at both ends: body entirely surrounded by the wing.

=--Hardy throughout New England; grows in any good
 Its very tall, slender habit makes
nurseries and is seldom used.

[Illustration: PLATE LXXXVI.
]
  1.

 Branch with sterile flowers.
  3.

 Branch with fertile flowers.
  5.

 Fruiting branch.
  7.



 HONEYSUCKLE FAMILY.

=Viburnum Lentago, L.

 SWEET VIBURNUM.

=Habitat and Range.

     Province of Quebec to Saskatchewan.


     South along the mountains to Georgia and Kentucky; west to

=Habit.
branches forming a wide-spreading, compact rounded head; conspicuous by
drooping clusters of crimson fruit which deepen to a rich purple when

=Bark.
separating in old trees into small, firm sections; branchlets
scurfy.

=--Leaf-buds long, narrow, covered with scurfy,
with two leaf-like scales extended into a long, spire-like point.
simple, opposite, 2-4 inches long, upper surface bright green, lower
sharply and finely serrate, smooth, tapered or abruptly pointed; base
above; stipules none.

=--May or early June.
compound, sessile cymes; calyx-tube adherent to the ovary, 5-toothed;
projecting, anthers yellow; pistil truncate.

=--Profuse, in clusters; drupes 1/2 inch long, oval, crimson when
rough, obscurely striate lengthwise.

=--Hardy throughout New England; prefers a rich
 Its showy flowers, healthy
plantations, and as an undergrowth in open woods.
collectors and occasionally by nurserymen; easily transplanted;

waste of the body, increase its growth, or maintain the heat, muscular,
 In its most comprehensive sense, the oxygen of the air
blood, and there re-acts upon the other food which has passed through the
 It is usual, however, to restrict the term food to such nutriment
 Water is often spoken of as

Many popular writers have divided foods into flesh-formers, heat-givers,
 Although attractive from its simplicity, this
 Flesh-formers are also
 Only a portion of the mineral matter goes to form bone.

--INORGANIC COMPOUNDS.
  Sub-class 1.
 2.


 Non-Nitrogeneous or Ternary Compounds.

 _c_ Organic Acids.
  2.
 _a_ Proteids.

--NON-NUTRITIVES, FOOD ADJUNCTS AND DRUGS.
  Essential Oils, Alkaloids, Extractives, Alcohol, &c.

given; but they are consumed with the true foods or nutrients, comprised

Water forms an essential part of all the tissues of the body.
solvent and carrier of other substances.

burnt.
fluoride, sodium chloride, potassium phosphate and chloride, and compounds

Mineral matter is quite as necessary for plant as for animal life, and is
ones, such as sugar, starch and oil.
calcium phosphate for the growth of their bones, whilst adults require
 The outer part of the grain of cereals is the richest in mineral
 Wheatmeal and oatmeal
contained in them.
for every tissue of the body.

served nearly dry, or with parsley or other sauce.
less tasty but important saline constituents are lost.
the following experiments:--German whole lentils, Egyptian split red
sufficient cold water to keep them covered.
evaporated, the residue heated in the steam-oven to perfect dryness and
 After pouring off the water, the haricots were boiled in more

evaporated and dried.
of the water-soluble ash was calculated as potash (K_{2}O).
of water which could be poured off was with the German lentils, half as
be poured off the others.

 Lentils.
 Lentils.
  Cooked H.
Proportion of liquid   1.
25         1.
Soluble dry matter     0.
38         1.
66 per cent.
Ash                    0.
40         0.
26  "   "
02         0.
084      0.

to be considerable.
removed, lose most.
phosphate and lime.
boiling a large quantity is lost, by steaming less and by baking in the
 The flavour is also much better after baking.

no proper substitute for the loss of their natural saline constituents.
Natural and properly cooked foods are so rich in sodium chloride and other
 An excess of the
 It is
pulse, savoury food, potatoes and soups.
very salt, and sometimes white is also.
irritation of the skin, and the writer has knowledge of the salt food of
 As a rule, fondness
food thus flavoured becomes unpalatable.

produced by chemical means).

The Non-Nitrogenous Organic Compounds are commonly called carbon
nitrogenous compounds.
furnish by their oxidation or combustion in the body the necessary heat,
 The final product of their combustion is

The Carbohydrates comprise starch, sugar, gum, mucilage, pectose,
; cellulose and woody fibre are carbohydrates, but are little
 They contain hydrogen and oxygen in the proportion
combustion.
 It is insoluble in

during digestion.
milk sugars.

but the hydrogen is in larger quantity than is necessary to form water,
 During their
8.
225) as much heat as the carbohydrates; but if eaten in more than
the intestines.
quantity consumed as food, as an animal may become quite fat on food
 A moderate quantity favours digestion and the bodily
 In cold weather more should be taken.
Esquimaux consume enormous quantities.

8 to 12.
)
The most esteemed and dearest oil is Almond.
oil (Oleum Amygdalæ Persicæ), but which in commerce includes the oil
whilst it is considerably cheaper.

oil.
not as agreeable to English taste as the oil previously mentioned.
best qualities are termed Virgin, Extra Sublime and Sublime.
been exposed for more than a short time to the light and heat of a shop
 It should be kept
 Not only does it vary much in freedom from acid and
 Two other cheaper oils deserve
 The "cold-drawn" Arachis oil (pea-nut or earth-nut oil) has a
 The "cold-drawn" Sesamé
edible purposes.
usually sold being much inferior to Peach-kernel and Olive oils.
Cotton-seed oil is the cheapest of the edible ones.
under any descriptive name, is usually refined Cotton-seed oil, with

The solid fats sold as butter and lard substitutes, consist of deodorised
 It is claimed
, made from them may be kept for a much longer period,
used.
almond, walnut, &c.
"
The better quality oils are quite as wholesome as the best fresh butter,
 Bread can be dipped into the oil, or
 The author prefers to pour a
nuts in themselves rich in oil), mix with a knife to a suitable
 Pine-kernels are very oily, and can

Whenever oils are mentioned, without a prefix, the fixed or fatty oils are
 The volatile or essential oils are a distinct class.
Occasionally, the fixed oils are called hydrocarbons, but hydrocarbon
 Of

Vegetable Acids are composed of the same three elements and undergo
 They rouse the
with the alkalies, thus increasing the alkalinity of the blood.
vegetable acids are: malic acid, in the apple, pear, cherry, &c.
acid, in the lemon, lime, orange, gooseberry, cranberry, strawberry,
; tartaric acid, in the grape, pineapple, &c.

 or food adjuncts.
when in the insoluble state of calcium oxalate), and several other acids

Proteids or Albuminoids are frequently termed flesh-formers.
composed of nitrogen, carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and a small quantity of
 Their chief function is to form
transformed into fat or merely give rise to heat.
part of every living cell.

acid, sulphates, &c.

in the vegetable kingdom.
origin, are more easily digested than others.
physiological value from whichever kingdom they are derived.

, from bone, skin,
 They approach the proteids in composition, but
nutrition.
were formerly termed albuminoids to be always spoken of as proteids only.

nutritive value of gelatin, but also on account of the small quantity

The Vegetable Kingdom is the prime source of all organic food; water,
directly from the inorganic kingdom.
sheep for example--he is only consuming a portion of the food which that
 All the proteids of the
chemical form.

 The
proteids of the vegetables consumed.
grain and roots consumed by cattle, in most cases could have produced food
 By passing the product of the soil
that food is dissipated in maintaining the life and growth; little remains
 Some
our bodies and is consequently more valuable than similar constituents in
 Fat, whether from flesh or from
 The proteids of flesh, like
juices--taking the form of a perfectly diffusible liquid--otherwise they
 Thus the products of

food, and a large proportion was thought necessary for hard work.
thought to be required, not only for the construction of the muscle
 These
 A comparatively small quantity of proteid
general needs of the body.
slight increase of this food constituent.
carbohydrates and fats that should be eaten in larger quantity, as these
 The fact that animals, capable of
comparatively low proteid value, and that millions of the strongest races
diet, should have been sufficient evidence against the earlier view.

quantity of proteid matter, a very small quantity of glycogen (the animal
 Vegetable
proteid matter, a large proportion of starch and sugar and a small
 Some vegetable foods, particularly nuts, contain much

Investigation of the digestive processes has shown that the carbohydrates
water and carbon dioxide, which are easily disposed of.
the proteids undergo in the body are very complicated.
provision in the body for their digestion, metabolism, and final
vegetables.
purpose, are in part expelled in the same way as the carbohydrates; but
in the form of urea (a very soluble substance), and a small quantity of

There is reciprocity between the teeth and digestive organs of animals and
 The grasses, leaves, &c.
herbivora, contain a large proportion of cellulose and woody tissue.
Consequently, the food is bulky; it is but slowly disintegrated and the
 The cellulose appears but
 The herbivora possess
 The carnivora have
 Even they consume
and bones, but civilised man, when living on a flesh dietary removes as
 The monkeys, apes, and man (comprised in
and in length to the herbivora and carnivora.
indigestible matter is necessary for exciting peristaltic action of the
 The carnivora with their short intestinal canal need the least,
 The
cause of the constipation to which flesh-eating nations are subject.
of the pills and other nostrums which are used in enormous quantities

Highly manufactured foods, from which as much as possible of the
those interested in its sale.
were possible to remove or modify a great part of our digestive canal (we
foods may be useful).
Metchnikoff, has given it as his opinion that much of man's digestive
disease.
serious disease, to remove the entire stomach or a large part of the
 It is
of our progenitors.
food formed little or no part, and to-day, in those countries where one
the rule, diseases of the digestive organs are rare.
to a tropical country and partaking largely of flesh and alcohol, suffers
few of his own countrymen, living in accordance with natural laws are

Indigestible Matter--Food is never entirely digested.
against confining ourselves solely to vegetable food, it has been stated
therefore throws more work on the digestive organs.
on this account a greater quantity of vegetable food is required.
shown elsewhere that, on the contrary, vegetarians are satisfied with a
 Man requires a small quantity of woody fibre or
constipation.

body.
of undigested food, but also of residues of the digestive juices, mucus
 These latter have been shown to amount to from
had previously been supposed.

cent.
showed 12.
 Such a method of analysis was adopted as it was
 The experiments were
 It seems probable
not formed the sole food.
finely as possible, the coarse is not only to a less extent assimilated
 Notwithstanding that fine white bread gave
2 per cent.
9 per cent.
wheatmeal bread is more economical as the same quantity of wheat produces
 From a
proteids there is digested when animal food is eaten 98 per cent.
cereals and sugars 8 per cent.

constituents was much less.
in favour of animal food, there are other considerations of far more
 The main question is one of
 In some dietary experiments of a girl aged 7, living upon a fruit
gives the following particulars.
absorbed were proteids 82.
9, nitrogen free extract 96, crude
7, heat of combustion in calories 86.
 He says,
coefficients of digestibility being about the same as are found in an
 It is interesting to note that 80 per cent.
crude fibre appeared to be digested.
experiments on the digestibility of crude fibre by man are from 30 to 91.
per cent.
in a diet made of rice, vegetables and meat.


P = Proteins.
Cb = Carbohydrates.
C = Cellulose.
R = Refuse.
W = Water.
Ca = Calories.

NOTES ON THE TABLE OF ANALYSIS.
per pound of food.
is included with the carbo-hydrate, the figures being those given in
 He has found that from 30 to 91 per cent.
fibre was digested, according to the kind of food.
cellulose in analytical tables is not a very definite one.
the details of the method of analysis.
cellulose is excluded in calculating the calories.
proportion of the sum of the carbo-hydrate and fat, compared with the
 The fat has first been multiplied by 2.
the same nutrient value as the carbo-hydrate.

of Agriculture Experimental Station, Bulletin 28, the tests being chiefly
 W.
 Atwater, or under his direction.
analyses of several samples.
rejected in preparing the food; the outer leaves, skin, stalk, seeds, &c.
of vegetables; the shell of eggs; the bone, &c.
 E, indicates
refuse, in brackets, is shown the quantity rejected before the analysis

There is considerable variation in the same kind of food, according to the
, especially is this the case
analyses of many samples have been given.
always been uniform, frequently the cellulose is included with the
quantity of non-proteid nitrogenous matter.
analysis of the mushrooms.
--Analyses are by John Goodfellow; it will be
whole-meal.
--B.
 S, from
S.
 Reports, 1899.
--A.
 Church.
dried condition as purchased; originally of the same composition as shewn
 C.
--Cavendish or Figi variety of banana, analysis
W.
 Doherty, N.
 Wales.
--A.
S.
 Banana flour,
 This is widely used in Central America.
flour is from the unripe fruit, and contains starch 45.
; on
 K.
analysis.

--Made without salt.
 72.
at 2/6 per dozen.
09 per cent.
91 glycogen (animal
 The shell was of course excluded, also the liquid in the shell.
Apples.
, and such edible portion as

Cookery.
 A few, on the advice of their

 Cooking lessens
thorough cooking also destroys any parasites that may be present.
flesh is more stimulating to the animal passions, and excites ferocity in
 If the old argument was valid, that as flesh is much
therefore our best food, we do wrong in coagulating the albuminoids,

Fruits when ripe and in good condition are best eaten raw; cooking spoils
 Food requiring mastication and encouraging insalivation is
 Food is frequently made too sloppy or liquid, and is eaten too
 The cereals and
 When cooked in water the
fibres are separated and the nutritious matter rendered easy of digestion.
The flavour is greatly improved.
of food.
dishes, favouring over-eating.

 They
correct proportions that upon the addition of water only sodium tartrate
 Some powders contain an
 Self-raising flours should be avoided.
are commonly composed of--in addition to sodium bicarbonate--acid calcium
 Common baking
magnesia and alum.
sole object is to make money.
phosphate very frequently contain arsenic, and as the cheap commercial
 A good formula
, sodium bicarbonate 9 ozs.
rice flour 10 to 20 ozs.
the keeping quality and to add bulk.
carefully dried, the sodium bicarbonate at not too high a temperature or
closed and dry bottles.
adapted for pastry, is sodium bicarbonate 4 ozs.
,
 Custard powders consist of starch, colouring and
 Egg powders are similar to baking powders but contain yellow
 Little objection can be taken to them if they are coloured with
unpleasant taste.
much used, several of these are distinctly poisonous.

--It is better not to drink during eating, or insalivation may be
 The
 The refreshing nature
warmth of the water.
enter the blood stream and stimulate the nerve centres.
hot to cause congestion of the mucous membrane, is one of the best drinks.
When the purity of the water supply is doubtful, there is advantage in
 Some
morning; this cleanses the stomach from any accumulation of mucus.

freely used, and there be little perspiration, it is possible to do
hold freely in solution the waste products excreted by the body.

wines, are generally unwholesome, from their containing preservatives,

Stimulants.
oils, tannin, &c.
 They
diuretic effect.
waste.
named elsewhere.
only call forth reserve strength by exciting the heart, nervous system,
, to increased activity.
great, generally greater, than the previous stimulation.
as an occasional medicine, stimulants, should be avoided.
cocoa shows a good proportion of proteids and a very large quantity of
 The claim that it is a valuable and nutritious food would only be
fruits, &c.
 Were this attempted, poisoning would result from the large
 The food value of half a spoonful or thereabouts of
 Certain much advertised cocoa mixtures are
injurious.

--The most valuable is wheat, from its proteid being chiefly in
 From its tenacity, gluten enables a much better
 The outer part
 Wheatmeal bread
 A large proportion
digested, and in some experiments the waste has been enough to quite
 Coarsely ground, sharp
waste of nutriment; but finely ground wheatmeal is free from this
 The comparative
on the quality of the bread and the condition of the digestive organs.
Experiments on the digestion of bread and other things, have often been
in excessive quantity.
much pleasanter, more satisfying, and better flavoured than white; indeed,
 Most bakers' bread is of
 Flour and bread contain very little fat, the
 This is remedied by the addition
, which are rich in oil.
be mixed with the flour prior to cooking, or used afterwards.

an irritating action; the quantity is variable.
so-called heating effect of oatmeal on some persons is due.

--Analyses were made of 34 of these
Bulletin, 1904).
excess of ordinary food materials; that the claim made for many
statement that they are remedies for any disease.


scarcely any effect on their starch and other constituents.
is a mechanical one.
that on boiling with water, the water readily penetrates and more quickly
 There are other prepared cereal foods, but we doubt
labels.
necessary for cooking the ordinary cereals.
irritating when made into porridge, but there are some granulated wheats
 The Ralston breakfast food is
 They are rich in the phosphates and salts, found in the outer
 One cereal preparation called Grape Nuts, has had its
scientific application of the diastase of the grain.
easier of digestion and requires no cooking.
forms of indigestion.
starch being less perfectly changed; one at least of which is
 Properly cooked starch is readily digested by healthy

Pulse, or Legumes, includes haricots and other beans, peas and lentils.
The proteid contained is that variety known as legumin, which is either
 Pulse is
cent.
contains 35 per cent.
 of fat.
thorough cooking, haricots taking the longest time.
cooked sooner, and are better digested; this is chiefly due to the removal
 The haricots, bought from small grocers who have a slow
 Pulse is best adapted to
to cause flatulence or accumulation of gas in the intestines, and
 Haricots are easier to digest when mashed and mixed with
 Pulse was formerly stated to leave much undigested residue.
Recent experiments have shown that it is satisfactorily digested under
 Strümpell found beans in their skins to leave a
 Lentil meal mixed with
 Another
1-1/8 pound of dried split peas per day were eaten, only 17 per cent.
proteid matter was unabsorbed, which compares very well with the 11 per
 of proteid left from a macaroni diet, with which the same man was
 Had a reasonable quantity of peas been eaten per day,
other foods.

proteid; when well masticated they are a very valuable food.
one of the best, and the kernels can be purchased shelled, thus avoiding
 They can be finely ground in a nut-mill and used for several
wheatmeal they produce a rich flavoured bread.
sweet cakes and in rich puddings to increase their food value, lightness
 Pine kernels being very oily, can be used with flour in the

Fruits are generally looked upon as luxuries, rather than as food
 They are usually
substantial fare.
nearly all other raw foods, and consequently the proportion of
 Milk
 Certain foods which in the raw state
absorb a very large quantity; this is particularly the case in making
 Cabbage, cauliflower, Spanish onions and turnips, after cooking
 of water.
per cent.
 of water.
It is customary at meal times to drink water, tea, coffee, beer, wine, &c.
When a meal contains any considerable quantity of fresh fruits there need
 Notwithstanding that fruits contain so much water,
vegetables, will contain less water than the total quantity usually
foods.
condition, free from the pollution often met with in the water used for
 Raw fruits favour mastication, with its consequent
 Plums and what are
to disagree.
biscuits and with uncooked foods without any inconvenience.
likely to disagree when taken in conjunction with elaborately cooked
 Many cannot take fruit, especially if it be acid, at the same time
at the morning's meal.
the fruit preventing the saliva acting on the starch, scientific
the meal.
and vinegar, or pickles, with potatoes and bread, or even mint sauce with
 Bananas are an exception, as not interfering with the
 Bananas are generally eaten in an unripe condition,
converted into sugar, when they are both more pleasant and wholesome.
and fruit go well together.
dried fruit and walnut kernels or other nuts are excellent.

is small in proportion to the other constituents.
dwelt upon, owing to the prevailing exaggerated idea of the quantity of
 The tomato contains a large proportion, though the water
 Bananas, grapes and strawberries contain to each part of
being calculated into starch equivalents); this is termed the nutritive
 Although this may seem a small proportion of proteid, there are
 Taking the average of 29
 If it
quantity of proteid would be an insurmountable difficulty.
of nuts or other nutritious food sufficiently increases the proteid, no
 A study of
anatomy, points to fruits, nuts and succulent vegetables as our original

The potash and other salts of the organic acids in fruits tend to keep the
 Where there is a tendency to the deposition of
 Citric, tartaric, malic
other bases, as well as in the free state.
eaten, combine with the alkalies in the intestinal tract, and are absorbed


 Fruit salts and
 Fruits have often proved of the greatest benefit
 What is known as the grape cure has been productive of much
 Lemons and oranges have also been of great benefit.
have been craved for and have proved of the greatest advantage in some

distribution and lessened cost.
it can be produced in great abundance at little cost, and with
 The price paid by the public greatly exceeds
 A very large proportion, often the greater
middle-men's profits.
sea, including land carriage on either side, than it is to transport
 English homegrown
land at a reasonable price, and the cost of transit.
prime fruit there is a lack of sufficient intelligence, of scientific

Vegetables--using the name in its popular sense--contain valuable saline
 By the usual method of cooking a large proportion
 It is better to steam than to boil them.
portion of vegetables is not all digested, but it is useful in stimulating
constipation.
correct the defects of their other food.

 There is a little
 The eyes and

Fungi.
many of the fungi are poisonous, some intensely so.
expected that these lowly organised plants, differing so much in their
particularly nourishing.
above the ground, that is generally eaten.
 Of
amount of water was 89.
, leaving only 10.
 of solid
55 per cent.
been greatly over-rated.
elsewhere, the total nitrogen has been multiplied by 6.
expressed as proteid.
purpose of nutrition is about a third of the whole.
proteid nitrogen, it is said much is not assimilated, sometimes quite
 An
2 per cent.
(useless nitrogenous compounds) 1.
, and water 93.

much more expensive.

Milk and Eggs are permissible in a vegetarian dietary, and as a rule,
 Eggs, with the exception of such as are unfertile,
said to suffer any pain on being killed and eaten.
use as food is, that on an egg and poultry farm, the superfluous male
killed.
man.
being perhaps made up by unnatural farinaceous milk substitutes.
the calves, especially the bull calves, are killed, thus leaving all the
 When cows cease to yield sufficient milk they too are
 Milch cows are commonly kept in unhealthy houses, deprived
floors reeking with their excrements, tended by uncleanly people.
exercise and a rich stimulating diet they produce more milk; but it is no
 When the
rest of the carcase is passed by veterinary surgeons as fit for food; were
 As butcher's
the butchers as too bad for food.
poultry lead a happy existence and their death is, or should be, quickly
natural causes.
arrives for their transport to the slaughter man's.
vegetarians who take milk and animal products that they are not

animals is a part, they cannot be altogether exonerated.
prone to absorb bad odours, and it forms a most suitable breeding or
therein.
fever, diphtheria, cholera, and typhoid.
tubercle bacilli from the cows themselves.
except a few which may be left out of consideration, are destroyed.
a temperature, however, renders the milk less digestible and wholesome for
 By heating to 160° F.
 for a few minutes, such
diphtheria, &c.
affected: this is called Pasteurising.
common practice to add boric acid, formaldehyde and other preservatives;
 They

For infants the only satisfactory food is that of a healthy mother.
account of physical defects in the mother, or often for merely selfish
 Many attempts have
human milk.
composition, in certain proportions.
this is put into practice.
Soxhlet.
the right quantity of cream or fat--a very difficult thing to do--the
 Although not
 We have
 To cow's milk of pure average
3 per cent.
sugar; or, what amounts to the same thing, to a pint of cow's milk add one
 It is
water.
about 75° C.
, but must not exceed 80° C.
albumen of the milk takes place which affects its digestibility.
this temperature for about ten minutes.
of cotton wool should be placed in the neck of the bottle, and it should
 Professor Soxhlet does not advise
 The proteids are not of the same composition
plan to add water or barley water to milk until it is so watered down that
 An infant has thus either to distend
insufficient food.
little.
they give to infants, up to 9 months old, Prof.
that an equal volume of water is added to the milk.
especially hen's eggs contain a very large proportion of proteid.
added to food poor in proteid they improve its nutritive quality.
often been said, and with truth, that some vegetarians by the profuse use
than the average person who includes flesh food in his dietary.
of proteid from these sources is less injurious as eggs contain no purins,
 In support of the use of animal
stimulating drinks, that the use of milk, butter, cheese and eggs renders
easier.
and sometimes can scarcely be distinguished from those of cooked flesh.

difficult to procure away from home, eggs, cheese, and milk are a great

Digestion.
which produce chemical changes in the food.
to be liquefied.
chemical change before being fitted for absorption into the body.
alimentary canal is a tubular passage which is first expanded into the
 As the food passes down, it is acted
matter is absorbed, whilst the residue passes away.

 It is alkaline and contains a
 This acts energetically on the cooked and
 Starch is quite insoluble
substance called soluble-starch.
completed, the starch is converted into one of the sugars called maltose.
In infants this property of acting on starch does not appear in effective
before that time.
twelfth month, when it may be gradually increased.
 Sims Wallace has
eighth month, was for the purpose of enabling the infant--in the
fruits so as to permit his extracting the soluble contents by suction; and
such vegetable substances as apples, oranges, and sugar cane.
 Harry
custom, as liquid or pap, but in a form compelling vigorous mastication,
till he discovered how to cook his vegetable food, obtained practically
 If it is given as liquid or pap it will
while if it is administered in a form which obliges the child to chew it
exercise which they crave, and without which they cannot develop normally,
converted within the mouth into maltose.
a convenient form in which to administer starch to children.
crust may be put in the oven and rebaked, and spread with butter.
we may give hard plain biscuits.
 Campbell continues, that he does not
whatever in man's dietary at the present day, but we should arrange that a

The teeth perform the very important function of breaking down our food
afterwards with the digestive juices.
tendency to degeneracy in the teeth than do other races; the teeth of the
 A
 1054) "I have had the opportunity of
state, from the Red Indians of North America, the negroes of Africa, to
usually found them possessed of sound teeth, but so soon as they come
Paris and other cities, their teeth begin to degenerate, though their
" In a long article on mastication in the
 84) from which we have already quoted, Dr.
Campbell gives as the effect of thorough and efficient mastication, that
prolongs the period of starch digestion within that organ.
influences the stomach reflexly by promoting the flow of gastric juice.
That the frequent use of the jaws and the tongue, during the period of
 If the jaws are not adequately exercised
normal size, the teeth are overcrowded, do not develop fully, and are
 The effect of vigorous mastication is to stimulate the
firm dental setting.
 Campbell writes: "I am perfectly at one with Dr.
Wallace, in believing that the removal of the fibrous portion of food is
"
When the food reaches the stomach, gastric juice is secreted.
contains a ferment called pepsin and hydrochloric acid.
active in an acid media.
a time--stated as from 15 to 30 minutes--when the acid gastric juice has
the saliva.
 After a time
of the small intestine, called the duodenum.
pancreatic juice, which like the gastric juice attacks proteids, but even
 The proteolitic ferment
 The pancreatic, the most important of the digestive
digestion of any remaining or imperfectly converted starch left from the
 Amylopsin is much more powerful and rapid than the
 Its absence from the
given them.
 The bile is
that leaves the stomach; it also assists the absorption of fats.
digestion of proteids is not completed in the stomach.
look upon the stomach as chiefly of use as a receptacle for the large mass
intestines; the food being gradually expelled from the stomach, in such
 A frequently
in the stomach, is of little practical value.
the digestion of food, there is a duplication of ferments for the proteids
 In health, the ferments are not only very active, but are
 The digestive or unorganised ferments must
 The latter are
 The former
thousands of times their mass of food, their power in this direction is
 Another and preferable name for them is

The action of saliva on starch is powerfully retarded by tea, this is due
 Coffee and cocoa are without effect.
minutes only, was not found to have sensibly less restraining effect than
 On peptic digestion both tea and coffee
 When of equal strength cocoa was nearly
of little consequence.

air, in water and almost everywhere on or near the surface of the earth.
They are consequently taken in with our food.
those in carious teeth are often sufficient to injuriously affect
 The healthy gastric juice is to a great degree
 When the
very great numbers.
growth.
character.
and being absorbed into the body produce headaches, exhaustion,
 Proteid matter, the products of its
bacteria; this is shown in the offensiveness of the fæces of the
the herbivora.
flesh and on a nearly vegetable diet.
if it consists largely of flesh, the bacterial products in the intestines
 On the latter such a disease as
 Professor Elie Metchnikoff, of the Pasteur
intestine fulfils no useful purpose, and on account of its breeding a very
with.
digestible, has a small intestine which is disproportionately fully
 Instead of having between 18 and 21 feet of small intestine,
 According to him, there is a
 Referring to such views,
portions of the intestines upon too little provocation, Sir W.
M.
, F.
S.
 Medical Jrn.
 874) says:--"Is this human
and requires so much tinkering? Possibly I may be out of fashion with the
alleged.
it work, the better one understands it and the more one is struck with the
" Our food we can
 Our
bulky and solid food.
of time.
cooked vegetable foods; but unfortunately there is a want of conformity
 If a flesh diet is taken, the incongruity is
 Concentrated food causes constipation.
out-of-door life, can take unsuitable food with little or no apparent
whilst the same food to a sedentary person will prove distinctly

Some persons have such a vigorous digestion that they can consume almost
but excessive in quantity.
 Many
to their full, without bad effect.
esteemed for their joviality and good nature, but who have broken down in
 There are others
constitutions, never having had the buoyancy and overflowing of animal
all their more healthy but less careful comrades.
parents are often most evident in the children or grandchildren.
are many persons who cannot eat of some particular food, although it may
 Sometimes it is a psychological rather than
will.
although it is not always possible to give a sound reason for it.
main, of course, there are principles of dietetics applicable to all
according to his experience.
idiosyncrasy, a little humouring of our taste and digestion will often
 It is generally those of delicate
 Some cannot eat oatmeal except in
 Olive and other vegetable oils, even when of good quality
wholesome, or even better than butter.
lard in pastry both by its taste and its after effects, although those
 It is also surprising how some
lives.

and causing an excessive secretion of hydrochloric acid.
proteid food is present, the pepsin and acid expend themselves on it, and
 The undigested starch continues to stimulate gastric
 If
milk, butter, cheese, &c.
 For this form
 First; the very
little good extract of malt, either at the time of eating or directly
 The diastase of the malt has the same action on starch as the
 It is better, scientifically, to have the
 (as hot as the mouth can bear will do),
 On keeping the mixture warm, from a few
soluble.
 The food known as Grape
 The use of malt extract,
 Second; the
hard food, which demand thorough mastication and insalivation, and the
act.
 Third; the taking of sodium bicarbonate
acid in the stomach.
to be repeated after each meal; in course of time the quantity of soda has
 Fourth; the abstention
 In
 This method often
organs is very bad.

which the daily amount of food required should be divided.
appears to work to the best advantage when it is full, or nearly so, and
 Three approximately equal meals seems to be a
 Dr.
day, and it seems incontestable that many persons find the plan
 These are generally adults with weak digestions, or elderly
assimilative functions, require comparatively little food.
account of their vigorous vitality, rapid growth and hearty appetites,
 Persons who have got into the
distended and unusually large, sometimes find it easier to restrict their
 The general
the ingestion of such a large quantity is bad for the stomach and causes
 The large quantity of blood and nerve
system, causing drowsiness and incapacity for mental and physical work.
The carnivora, whose opportunity for obtaining food--unlike the
opportunity and are in the habit of sleeping after a meal.
and herbivora, however, are alert and ready to fly from their enemies
 The conveying of so much nourishment to the liver and
 A light lunch
 The stomach is
another is imposed upon it, no time being left for recuperation.

--The best proportions of proteids, carbo-hydrates and fats
decided.
persons, particualrly of soldiers and prisoners.
adjusted empirically (the earlier ones at least), and are generally
 They are chiefly of English and German origin.
Another method is to laboriously analyse the injesta or food consumed and
food is found which is just sufficient to keep the body in equilibrium.
This latter plan is the best, but to be quite satisfactory must be tried
quantity and kind of food.
persons accustomed to a stimulating dietary: their usual food has included
 Sufficient
who partake of little if any flesh food.
man of average weight, doing a moderate amount of work, is variously
to 125 grammes, and carbo-hydrates 450 to 550 grammes.
surprising difference of opinion on the amount of fat, but those who give
 Dr.
R.
highest authorities as follows:---
Proteid       125 g.
4 oz.
1 =  512 cal.
 N,  62 C
 (17.
)   4.
Fat            50 g.
8 oz.
3    465                  38
               675 g.
8    )         3027 Total  20 g.

9.
and measures are used, instead of the inconvenient English grains, ounces,
 (1 gramme = 15.
5 grains =
35 grammes).
generating heat and muscular energy (these two being convertible).

amount of heat which would raise a kilogramme (1000 grammes) of water 1°
 This is the same as raising 1 pound weight 4° Fahrenheit.
According to the table given, 125 grammes of dry proteid are required per
 When
muscular work equals 512 kilo-calories.
additional value as tissue formers.
1 and 9.
are those commonly employed; but the latest and most reliable research,
in the body, gives for proteid and carbo-hydrate 4 calories, and for fat
9 calories.

1 : 9.
27
0 : 89 = 2.

225 was used.
or of a boy 14 to 16 years of age, is given as equivalent to eight-tenths
 A
 The following table gives
 The
of good wages, approximate to the standard dietaries, except that the fat
 This is due to an
 It was thought unnecessary to give them in

 Fat.
 Cal.
R.
Hutchison: Man, moderate muscular work            125   50   500  3027  4.

Man--3 years' exclusively vegetable diet (_c_)     54   22   557  2710 11.
Thomas Wood, the miller of Billericay (_d_)        55    5.
0
Dr.
man leading a decidedly active life.

--(_a_) The Japanese are of small stature and weight.

W.
 1-1/2 lbs.
wheatmeal per day was required for equilibrium; sedentary occupation, with

(_c_) See "A Text Book of Physiology," by M.
ii.
 839; the diet was bread, fruit and oil.
good health and stationary weight; only 59 per cent.
digested, leaving the small quantity of 32 grammes available for real use.
In commenting upon this, Professor Foster writes:--"We cannot
knowledge will not at present permit us to make an authoritative exact
disadvantage to the body, when accompanied by adequate provision of the
undertaking a small or large amount of labour.

 Carpenter, and also
 Pavy.
George Baker.
for upwards of eighteen years on no other nutriment than 16 oz.
made into a pudding with water, no other liquid of any kind being taken.

nobleman, who died in the year 1566 at the age of 98.
he spent a life of indulgence, eating and drinking to excess.
time, having been endowed with a feeble constitution, he was suffering
intolerable thirst continually hanging upon him.
physicians of Italy was unavailing.
habits of diet, and made a complete recovery.
treatise on a "Sure and certain method of attaining a long and healthful
" He says, what with bread, meat, the yolk of an egg and soup, I ate
, neither more nor less.
 of wine.
When 78 he was persuaded to increase his food by the addition of 2 oz.
day, and this nearly proved fatal.
being one of weakness, infirmity and misery, I find myself to be in the
 At 83 I am always merry,
 A sober life has preserved me in
 My teeth are all as
 He was able to take moderate exercise in riding and
 He was very passionate and hasty in his youth.
wrote other treatises up to the age of 95.

experiments, reduced the quantity of proteid required per 24 hours to 45
 T.
is possible for a healthy man (in one case for 15 days and in another for
proteid per day.


 The food
endives, apples, oranges, preserves, sugar, starch, butter, chocolate and
 At the commencement, the day's food contained 14.
nitrogen = 89.
 On the 7th day
6 g.
 = 73.
 proteid was reached; during this time less N.
eliminated, indicating that the proteid food was in excess of that
 As the quantity of nitrogenous
 eliminated was found to diminish
 This latter was in slight excess of that absorbed; but when a day or
tended to adjust itself to the dimished supply, and there was an
 The smallest quantity of food was
06 N.
7 proteid, which was obviously
19 N.
9 proteid was eliminated.
12
 = 26 proteid was injested, and 4.
 was eliminated.
drawn from the research is that about 26 grammes of proteid per day was
 The weight of the body remained practically constant
 Of course the
proteid was left off, it was replaced by a proper quantity of
 These experiments were carried out in the usual
 It may, however, be urged against any
required for the body, being drawn from such experiments, that the period
 A prolonged trial might have revealed
 We are quite justified in
unnecessarily large proportion of proteid.
grammes and under have seemed enough; but for the ordinary adult man, who
also, it is probably advisable not to take less than 70 or 80 grammes per
 If it is desired to try less, the diminution
strength.

 That of the
ample, according to some of the authorities we have given; yet she was
 The food was doubtless of bad quality, and it appears
calories.
deficiency of food constituents, is probably the cause of the bad health
 There is no reason to think the proteid insufficient,
 We have no particulars of the
 In the poor
 In Dr.
R.
experiment on a wheatmeal dietary, it will not do to assume that less than
 It is probable that a
carbohydrates had been increased.
standard.
being not far from the usual standard, yet 54 grammes of proteid sufficed.
It is a common error to place an undue value on the proteids to the extent
 Dr.
Food," p.
per day.
 Haig is of opinion that the quantity
required.
whereas, according to the usual figures (125 x 6/10) a boy of this age
 This quantity of 45 g.
boy's age, than that in several of the dietaries we have given in our
 A little consideration will show that Dr.
serious deficiency of the milk in the other constituents, which accounts
 The quantity of milk contains only about 160
 of total solid matter, whilst 400 g.
 Milk is
human being.
constituents.

is the principal source of muscular energy or strength.
discovered and acknowledged his error, and the subject has since been
 The makers of meat extracts and other foods,
advantage of the lack of knowledge and prejudice of the public, call
 The carbo-hydrates and fats are equally

Our reason for devoting so much space to the consideration of the quantity
it is the crux of vegetarianism.
obtain sufficient from vegetable foods alone, without consuming an
 We will summarise the argument as
and which is repeated in Furneaux's "Animal Physiology," a book which is
amounts to, carbon 4,500 grains (or 300 grammes), and nitrogen, 300 grains
 Now let us suppose a person to feed on bread only.
order to obtain the necessary quantity of nitrogen to repair this waste
 daily.
.
 He would be compelled to
necessary weight of nitrogen.
.
 Next, let us suppose that he feeds on
 Then, in order to obtain the necessary quantity of carbon,
 daily.
.
 In this case we notice a
of work to the organs concerned.
.
 But it is possible to take such a
system, and at the same time yield but little waste material.
extracts are from Furneaux, the next is from Kirke.
argument is the same in each, but we have chosen those sentences for
being omitted.
economically what was necessary .
.
 of meat, and less
 of bread would supply all the needful carbon and nitrogen with
 From these facts it will be plain that a mixed diet is
entirely coincides with what might have been anticipated on theoretical
" Professor Huxley, in his "Elementary Physiology" uses

The adoption of this high proteid or nitrogen figure would lead to some
 One writer states that 18 eggs would contain
larger quantity would be required to supply enough carbon.
hand, Professor Church says that, no less than 70 lbs.
to be eaten per day, to supply the necessary quantity of nitrogen;
 The curious may calculate the

class, race, or nation eat, is the proper and necessary diet; at least as
 The error
sense and the experience of the greater part of the earth's inhabitants,
well-to-do European.
a large abdomen and a coarse, ruddy, if not inflamed face, indicative of
 An unhealthy
 Even if we accept a high proportion of proteid, it
quantity of the various constituents, without a superfluity of the
 In "Food Grains of India," Professor A.
 Church shows by
various combinations of cereals, pulses, etc.
standard of 282 grains of nitrogen and 5,060 grains of carbon, with a
 In his examples
by the addition of the proper quantity of rice--4 to 16 ounces, and a
 Such a large quantity of pulse appears to us excessive, and
 We much doubt whether those

Some valuable investigations were made on the diet of a family of
1900, by Professor M.
 Jaffa (bulletin 107).
proteid and carbo-hydrate used was surprisingly small.
particularly important, as the diet was not an experimental one, tried

fruitarians for five to seven years, and made no change in their dietary
 They only had two meals a day, the food being eaten
 The quantities of all the foods and other particulars are
 The first meal was at 10-30 a.
, and always
 The other meal was about 5 p.
,
 The nuts
were apples, apricots, bananas, figs, grapes, oranges, peaches and pears.
Other foods were dates, raisins, pickled olives, olive oil and honey.
person (_b_) ate a little celery and tomatoes, and another (_c_) a little
 In the following table are given the average daily quantities
fibre, value in calories and nutrient ratio.
a carbo-hydrate and included in the calorie value, and also in calculating

                                        Pro.
 C'r'b.
 Cal.
 R.
Woman, age 33, weight 90    lbs.
6
1
5
3
1
4
The last research extended over ten days; the period during which each of

(_a_) The tentative standard for a woman at light work calls for 90
of food eaten was far below that usually stated as being necessary.
subject, however, was a very small woman, 5 feet in height, taking almost
 She believed, as do fruitarians generally, that
 (_b_) The food eaten was even
 One reason for this was the
mental strain, and did not have her usual appetite.
of food, judging by her appearance and manner, seemed sufficient for her
nieces and nephew, the subjects of the other experiments.
was given cereals and vegetables when she craved them, but her aunt says
returns to her next meal of uncooked food with an increased appreciation
 The commonly accepted dietary standard for a child 13
and 2,450 calories, yet the girl had all the appearance of being well fed
 (_d_) During the 22 days of
that the family had been in straitened circumstances, and the food
 (_e_) The subject had been
 She was very small for her age, being 10 pounds
 It is
made during this dietary and the one immediately following.
to her being urged to eat all she wanted, of what she most preferred, as
 The proteid is less than
appeared perfectly well and was exceedingly active.
being a healthy child, but looked younger than her age.
is the same as in the previous experiment (_e_), but after an interval of

Professor Jaffa, who made the investigation, says:--"It would appear that
their light weight.
upon this diet for seven years, and think they are in better health and
judgment.

were said to be unusually free from colds and other complaints common to
 The youngest child, and the only one who has lived as a
 She looked fully
 Still, there are so many children who are
standards, that it would be unfair to draw any conclusions until many more
"
The research shows that not only is there need of a revision of the

vegetarians, that the latter require a much larger quantity of food than
 The truth is that vegetarians eat less, often
 It is a common experience that vegetable food has a more
without the inconvenience that a flesh-eater, especially a flesh and
 This is due, in part at least, to its less
 This fact has been shown
especially in the comparatively fresh condition in which they have
 Those who
stimulating foods and drinks, usually finish in a very exhausted
 The superior endurance and recovery from wounds, when compared
and Japanese, has often been remarked.
food, as it contains more fibre and is slower of digestion, taxes the
 If we attempted to eat uncooked, the more fibrous
is not so of the ordinary food of vegetarians.
does not necessarily imply a greater strain on the system.
in particular, are for the longest period of time in the intestines, and
process of digestion in that organ may be more thorough.
entail less expenditure of nervous energy than if the food had been of

 If the food is of right
cookery, and the digestive ferments are normal, digestion proceeds without

simple living vegetarian.
excrementitious matter or extractives; these stimulate the digestive
 Generally, he is fond of
probably of tobacco.

There are on record certain experiments which appear to indicate the
been of vegetable origin.
subject has been accustomed to an ordinary flesh diet, perhaps also to
 The change to a comparatively non-stimulating diet
a few days.
people, and yet that same diet would suit others.
food has not been appetising, the subject has even taken it with
no vegetarian or anybody else would think of using in a practical dietary.

and strength.
discontinue the flesh, without substituting suitable foods.
think it is from a deficiency of proteid, and recommend an addition of
reference to the table of analyses, show a low nutrient ratio figure.
may also be due to an insufficiency of food eaten, owing to the
 In
are rather rich in proteid, and that approximate somewhat in their flavour
 A further change to a
tastes and bodily adaptability.
even an ultimately very advantageous one, will always meet with an
have been accustomed for many years, perhaps by inheritance for
 There are several preparations
has been removed, which consist chiefly of proteid.
increasing the proteid contents of foods which may be thought deficient.
The addition of these manufactured products appear unnecessary, as most
quantity or avoid altogether those that are thought defective.

physiological necessity; but they have attempted to justify its use by a
 It is admitted, that any excess of proteid
utilised as a force-producer, in a similar manner to the carbo-hydrates.
When the molecule is split up, and the carbon utilised, the nitrogen
 The theory propounded is
stimulates the living protoplasm of the nerve cells in its immediate
 These views are given by Dr.
Hutchison in his book on "Food," but there are no substantial grounds for
 It is only prompted by a wish to excuse a cherished habit.
William Roberts, M.
, in "Dietetics and Dyspepsia," p.
feeding consists mainly in a liberal allowance of meat, and in the
diet which is mainly vegetarian and non-alcoholic," and he proceeds to say
vitality and a greater brain-power than their low-fed brethren.
is remarkable how often we hear of eminent men being troubled with gout,
high-feeding.

to the pleasures of the table, but such habits are detrimental to
 The children and grandchildren of
deteriorated physique.
notwithstanding their great advantages of education, travel and leisure,
 In the recent war
and bravest in history; whilst the Japanese officers are more resourceful
aristocratic lineage.
benefit to the doctors and the proprietors of remedies for digestive and

Food Adjuncts and Drugs.
quantity of indigestible fibre of which we have already written, food
classify, and whose action on the body is but imperfectly understood.
of these possess pungent or strong odours and flavours.
fruits, meats, etc.
taste.
 Such oils
they are free from rancidity and of good quality.
the other nutrients in possessing a more or less decided taste.
vegetable acids also strongly affect the sense of taste, but they are only

A drug may be defined as a substance which modifies the functions of the
 This action
 A drug is taken for its
 It is
distinctions.
placed in one group, and sometimes in another, according to opinion of
poisons.
than of kind of action.
to have a markedly medicinal action, such things are generally called food
different view.
, are
 Even honey is
 The difference
 Some of the most
cause death; e.
, strychnine and morphine.

memory in grasping large numbers of things which can be grouped together.
Classifications, however, are artificial, not due to natural lines of
group is apt to approach and finally merge into another group, although on
 The disregard of this

Plants, like animals, as the result of tissue change, have certain used-up
 Animals have special excretory
dead animals.
oils, alkaloids, bitter resins, etc.
probability, excretory products of no assimilative value to the plant.
Certain volatile oils may attract insects, and in obtaining nectar from
 Agreeable volatile oils and
 The eating of
digestive system, to be disseminated over wide areas to the advantage of
 On the other hand, nauseous and poisonous alkaloids,
, serve as a protection against the attacks of browsing
 These nauseous substances are
 It is commonly
especially produced by Nature for the purpose.
species of plant and animal lives for itself alone, and protects itself,
enemies.
is most suitable.
may not contain the maximum of nourishment free from innutritious matter;
possessed of organs suited to its environment.
food containing less indigestible matter, or food which is more readily
their digestive system will be thrown out of gear, become clogged up or
burn coal, will act badly with wood or petroleum.
overlooked this fact, and have endeavoured to produce food substances for
such food would be more easily assimilated.

very large number of animal and vegetable foods.
to the flavour of fruits.
mustard, horse-radish, cloves, nutmegs, cinnamon, caraway seeds, mint,
 Onions contain a notable quantity.
the essential oils become powerful drugs.
stomachic and carminative, in larger quantities irritant and emetic.
Condiments and spices not only add flavour to food, but stimulate the

The Alkaloids most used are those of tea, coffee, kola-nut, cocoa, coca,
 Although the two last are generally smoked, they must
 It is of little consequence whether
lungs; their action on the blood and nervous system is the same.

varying nature.
 Amongst
 They will be treated at greater length hereafter.

action quite overshadows any food value it may possess.

 The active

There is a great difference of opinion as to the extent to which
 It is remarkable that amongst
alkaloids is in common use.
stimulants must supply a physiological need.
will apply with greater force to the use of condiments.
appear to us to be scarcely warranted.
practice of a thing proves its necessity, then has there been
other vices.
immediate and obvious effects as, for example, alcohol and opium, or
 Should it he said that only some of the
their universal use.
than very small quantities is distinctly injurious, and it is difficult to
what is vaguely called a moderate extent.
supposed medical necessity, and where taste attracts, little evidence
 Those in the habit of taking them, if honest, must confess that
 The ill-nourished and
 A food creates
legitimate form of stimulation.
on the reserve forces.
course gradually available--under stimulation is rapidly set free; there
 There may occasionally be
action, notwithstanding it may suffer an after depression; but such cases
stimulants should only be used, like other powerful drugs, under medical
 In the last 25 years the use of alcohol by the medical profession
evident.

digestive and nervous systems.
alcohol, and as its action is best known, it may be useful to name the
 Alcohol in the form of wine and spirits, in small
 Large quantities
 (Beer, however, retards digestion,
) Alcohol
causes the vessels of the whole body to dilate, especially those of the
 It the person previously felt
 The result of the increased circulation through
faculties are brightened for a time, and the muscular strength seems
 The person usually feels the better for it, though this is not
 It has been
 The heart,
alcohol has passed away than it was at first.
organs of the body which were stimulated.
of the blood vessels of the skin, an unusual quantity of heat is lost and
 After taking alcohol persons are less able to stand
 When overtaken by snowstorms or subjected to excessive or prolonged
have succumbed, whilst the others have survived.
have conclusively shown that teetotallers are longer livers than the
 The terrible effects on both body and mind of
or narcotics, are too obvious to need allusion to here; we are only

The stimulation produced by tea and coffee is in some respects like that
 The heart is stimulated and the blood pressure rises.
kidneys are strongly affected in those unaccustomed to the drug, but this
 Their chief effect is on the brain and

Many have boasted that they can take of what they call the good things of
or even many years, it seems a fact.
who have been esteemed for their joviality and good nature, who have
 On the
with indifferent constitutions, who never had the buoyancy and overflow of
more robust but careless companions.

--It is very difficult to decide to
 These have
properties of alcohol and the alkaloids.
dietetic practices of nations does not appear to be in conformity with any
 It varies with opportunity, climate and national
part to the dietetic habits.
foods, large numbers subsist chiefly on rice, others on the richer
, and fruit.
races who enjoy stronger flavoured food, including such things as garlic,
and smoked fish, high game or still more decomposed flesh, offal and
 The Greenlanders will eat with the keenest
it has been preserved under the grass of summer.
mess is made by pounding together prawns, shrimps, or any cheap fish; this
 It is largely used as a
 Numerous examples of this sort could
 There is scarcely anything that it is possible to eat, but has
 The strongest flavoured,
and most brutal races.
to eat anything he can get, and the Hottentot not only the flesh, but the
exquisite when boiled in beast-blood.
adaptability in the human body, but it would not be right to say that all
 The most advanced and civilised races,
whilst it is the most brutal, that take the most rank and strongly
 Even amongst the civilised there are great differences.
The assimilative and nervous systems can be trained to tolerate injurious
 A striking example is seen in the
body may in time be persuaded, not only to tolerate many times such a
pleasure from the drug.
increasing quantities, until such a dose is taken as would at first have
harm.

distress, as the body, when free from the artificial stimulation to which
 For
appetite and suitable food; without the first no food, however good and
 The sense of taste resides in
palate.

by the back of the tongue.
general feeling, which obscure any strictly gustatory sensations which may
 To affect the taste the food must enter into
 Like the other senses, taste may be rendered more delicate by
 Flavours are really odours, and the word smell would be more
 For example, what we call the taste of an onion, the flavour
 (independent of the sweetness or sourness of the fruit) is

Much has been written on the necessity of making food tasty, so as to
 It is urged that unless this is done
 Innumerable receipts (some
 All this is supposed
 The Anglo-Saxon race--the race whose
derangements, and without good digestion and the consequent healthy
 The most wholesome
mildly flavoured and simply prepared.
sweet bread, currant bread, etc.
as an occasional delicacy, soon palls on the appetite.
and mildest flavoured of the cereals, it is therefore often, perhaps
 The bulk
fish per day, and they are a fine, big and strong race.
labourer lives on similar food.
though many other cereals are eaten there.
fruits.
perfectly with the mildest flavoured food.
this.
feed on grass, herbs and fruits.
gorilla.
put it forth for long periods as can the herbivora.
animal, the horse, can exert much more muscular energy, weight for weight,
 The cost of feeding one of the herbivora is
 This is so
time, labour and energy on the part of man or of natural forces in the
 Herbs, roots, corn and fruit are produced much
etc.

The restlessness, craving for novelty, and love of excitement, so
European races, has its correspondence in the food of these races.
Highly-seasoned and nitrogenous foods act as a stimulant and favour
exertion, with a succeeding period of exhaustion.
long, sustained, uniform muscular strength, clearness of intellect, and
 Let no one misunderstand us; we do not assert that all who
there are other factors besides food, but that such qualities are more
 It is well known that
living on a stimulating dietary consisting largely of flesh have their
 Simple and abstemious living
periods, such as long walking, cycling, and other athletic feats and long

The digestive and assimilative organs need the food constituents of which
digestible condition.
organs can be trained.
the non-essential flavouring and stimulating part, rather than to that
 What is the best, interests but
 The
material body, its temporary vehicle.
ego, just as a horse, dog, or other of the lower animals recognises its
 The body can be led into good habits
sometimes painfully acquired.
movements, conditions, foods or drinks, within reasonable limits, derives
 It is only when the food, etc.
transgresses certain elementary principles, that the result is more or
 We may on scientific principles condemn flesh-foods,
there is still left a very great variety of foods and methods of preparing
 Of the foods thus
same person at different periods.

every tender influence, and is painfully jarred by that which is coarse.
To such, fruits and delicately flavoured and easily digested foods are
 A
non-responsive except to loud or coarse impulses; and such a one's

A person who is accustomed to a stimulating dietary of flesh-foods,
 Should such
over-eating.
and to appease the appetite; although an ample supply of nourishment be
 This is the reason why so many imagine that it is necessary to
 Should a distressing
to the vegetarian dietary instead of to themselves.
changing to a vegetarian dietary, commence by imitating flesh dishes in
 There is the additional
lack sympathy with the aesthetic and humane principles of the diet.
a while many of them incline to simpler flavoured foods.
the unperverted taste of childhood, for children love sweets, fruits, and
 One who loves savouries, as a
 By compounding and cooking, a very great
less than is usually, supposed.
increasing the range, diminishes it, by dulling the finer perception of
 The predominating seasoning also obscures everything else.
mixture of foods produces a conglomeration of tastes in which any
sameness.
choice of a greater range of foods and flavours than a vegetarian, he can

considerable extent? No one cares to take all the different kinds of food,
 Of edible animals but a
 A person who particularly relishes and partakes
mild-flavoured foods at one end of the scale.
from foods at the opposite end of the scale, not always from humane
 Thus there may be little to
class of persons.
than the sense of sight and hearing.
savouries seems to blunt the taste for fruits and the delicate foods.
grass and herbs on which the herbivora subsist, seems to our imagination
enjoyment, deliberately munching their food as though to get its full
 In all probability they find a considerable range of flavours in

Our elaborate cooking customs entail a vast amount of labour.
necessitate the cost, trouble and dirt from having fires in great excess
attending to food which has to be cooked: and the large number of greasy
 Cooked savoury food is
just previous to the meal.
discourages mastication and leads to defective teeth.
cookery is mainly due to our custom of eating so largely of flesh, whilst
art of cooking.
cooked.
otherwise diseased, that it would he dangerous to eat it raw, even were it
 In those countries where man eats flesh in a
 There is not the
for much over-eating, hasty eating, dyspepsia and illness.
the making of bread, porridge, and many other comparatively simple
 With
impossible to arrive at any satisfactory conclusion, and the whole
 Experiments have
hay, corn, meal, etc.
S.
 It was found that
 At least
country have been reported.
positive loss from cooking the food.
produce in the animal a pound gain in weight was larger when the food had
 In some cases, the increased

Those who live on uncooked food contend that a smaller quantity of
 As uncooked food requires more mastication and is
the digestive organs to be gradually brought into complete action, and
 In the case of the members of
previously written, the quantity of nutriment taken was much less than
stature and weight.

--Justus von Liebig, the great German chemist, was the
 He described a
 He
treat the chopped flesh with eight to ten times its weight of water, which
 In another passage he says it is to be boiled
 After straining from all the undissolved meat fibre,
, and carefully cleansing from all fat, the decoction is to be
albumin, gelatin and fat; all the nutritive principles except the saline
 Liebig states that 34 pounds of meat are
 In 1872, he wrote "neither tea nor
speak of their medicinal properties.
effect of a liquid preparation of meat, states that it exerted a rapid and
partial substitute for brandy, in all case of great exhaustion or weakness
 In like manner, a feast
vegetable, has been described by travellers as producing great excitement
 Similar effects
 Voit
practically useless as a food, and other authorities are quite of the same
 _The Extra
creatin, creatinin, globulin and urea, with organic potash and other
 It has been much over-estimated as a food either for invalids or
soups, beef-tea, etc.
" Meat
but as in the case of other stimulants there is a succeeding period of
 The _British Medical Journal_ says that the widespread belief
responsible for increasing the patient's discomfort, and is even capable
 Some of
poisonous effects on the body.
to mislead the public by absurdly false statements of the value of their
 They assert that their extracts contain the nutritive matter of
meat-lozenges are sufficient for a meal.
statement, or imply by pictorial advertisement, that the nutritive matter
another company that a tea-cup full is equivalent in food value to an ox.
Professor Halliburton writes: "Instead of an ox in a tea-cup, the ox's
consists largely of products on the way to urea, which more nearly
"
of beef-tea closely resembles urine, and is more an excrementitious
 Those whose business it is to make a pure
experimenting with bacteria, cannot fail to recognise its similarity both
 Little consideration is needful to show the
as to the food value of these extracts.
per cent.
 of water.
desiccated, one pound will be reduced to four ounces of perfectly dry
 of proteid matter and
 of fat including a little saline matter and the
 This is as far as it is possible to concentrate the beef.
it were possible to remove, without interfering with the nutritious
bodies, we should reduce it to a little less than four ounces.
remarkable that the most nutritious matter of the beef, the muscle
whilst the effete or waste products are retained.
preparations, some meat fibre has been added with the object of imparting
 Hence in some advertisements, now withdrawn, it was
to ordinary meat extracts.
following:--"It is hard for ladies to realise that the beef tea they make
and is nothing more than a slight stimulant.
patient has been starved on beef tea, whether made from fresh beef or from
 From these Bovril differs
and direct nourishment than fifty ounces of ordinary meat extract.
analyses of meat extracts are referred to, it will be seen that the
such extracts, and which the Company in their circular so emphatically
 If the meat fibre, which is the principal, if not the sole
advantage over ordinary beef, which can be procured at a very small
 Concerning this added meat fibre, C.
 Mitchell, in
,
obtain as much unaltered proteid as is contained in an egg.
hand, it has been pointed out that there is nothing to show that flesh
the same fine state of division, whilst the amount of flesh bases, the
" Concerning
H.
Analysis," vol.
, writes: "The amount of these constituents present in
time, is too insignificant to give it any appreciable value as nutriment.
Notwithstanding such statements by analysts and others, Bovril is
" The great
Lemco and Oxo Company.
1865 as 5,550,000; stock of cattle 160,000; employees in works, farms and
 This is only one out of many such companies.
thing that myriads of animals should be slaughtered with all the horrible
nutritious matter being nearly all wasted.
responsible for much sickness and death.
colds, influenza, and other complaints as is professed, they predispose to
organs and reducing the vitality.
are by Otto Hehner:--
Some of the "Liebig's Extract of Meat" so called, contains yeast extract;
 The
distillers' waste products, and there is a strong incentive for
 Artificial meat extracts
some, at least, have a considerably sharper flavour.
manufacture common salt is added, and this renders it unfit for use in
 J.
analyses of ten yeast extracts, and contrasted them with meat extracts
chemical composition of yeast extract does not greatly differ from that of
" Yeast extracts contain purin bodies, and are probably
 Such strong and rank flavours (the
who would cultivate a refined taste in food.

--As the result of destructive
products which have to be expelled as soon as is possible.
and accumulation would soon produce death.
lungs as carbon-dioxide, or as it is generally though less correctly
 Upon the breaking down of the complex proteid and
combinations.
bases or nitrogenous extractives.
meat, but are concentrated and conserved in the making of beef-tea or
 The spleen, lymphatic and other glands, and especially the
may readily separate them from the blood, that they may pass out of the
 By far the largest part of this waste nitrogen is expelled from the
 Pure urea is an
nitre.
body with great ease.
form of another body called hippuric acid.
urinary excretion of birds and serpents consists of urates; this is uric
 In man, in addition to the urea
these.
insoluble in water but soluble as urates in the presence of alkalies.
deposited from urine it is of a dull red sand-like appearance, as it has a

It is only possible to make a brief reference to the chief organic bases.
The xanthine bases are closely related to uric acid.
in small quantity in the urine and animal tissues, others, such as
 Creatine is a constant constituent of muscle
 In fowl's flesh there is said to be 0.
, in cod-fish
17 per cent.
07 per cent.
creatine with great facility; it exists in urine.
creatinine are readily soluble in water.
to creatinine have been isolated from the flesh of large animals by A.
Gautier; they are known as Gautier's flesh bases.
animals, these act more or less powerfully on the nerve centres, inducing
to the alkaloids of snake venom, but less powerfully than the ptomaines.
These bases are formed during life as a result of normal vital processes

Another class of bases of an alkaloidal nature, are termed ptomaines;
bacterial agency from dead flesh.
resulted from the eating of sausages, pork-pies, tinned meats, etc.
due to their having contained ptomaines.

excreted with ease, but it is otherwise in certain diseases.
specially noxious substances are produced, or the usual substances are in
consequence the body is poisoned.
introduce into their system the excretory matter contained therein, which
the body puts an unusual and unnatural strain upon the liver and kidneys.
It has been observed, that the eating of the flesh of some trapped animals
 The pain and horror of having a
only add to the misery, slowly being done to death during hours or even
 Leucomaine
an animal, fleeing from its pursuers, until its strength was completely
 Cases are also known, where a mother nursing her infant, has given
been made violently ill.
terrified animals to be wholesome.
the Atlantic, suffer acutely.
in a maimed condition, some being dead.
cruelty to which they are subjected whilst driven by callous drovers,
instinctive dread.
animals, should contain an unusually large quantity of the more poisonous

Purin Bodies.
the nucleus C_{5}N_{4}.
group of bodies.
guanin, adenin, caffeine and theobromine.
result from the wear and tear of certain cell contents, when they are
are distinguished as exogenous purins.
are readily converted into uric acid.
tissue change is, of course, unavoidable; but that resulting from the

An excess of uric acid is commonly associated with gout and similar
 The morbid phenomena of gout are chiefly manifested in the
 The articular cartilages become swollen,
 There is an accumulation of mortar like matter
 This is calcium urate (not sodium urate as is generally
 These nodular concretions are called tophi or chalkstones.

gout and the part played by uric acid; many have had to be discarded or
 Though much light has recently been thrown on the
 The subject is one which is
discussion here, were it not for the following reason: Certain views on
present time being pushed to the extreme in some health journals and
 Unfortunately many of the writers have very little knowledge,
were a simple one that had been quite settled.
ground to some extent, for a better understanding of its fundamentals,
 Our remarks, however, must be brief.
undeniable that great eaters of meat, especially if they also take
kidneys, about or soon after the time of middle life.
relatively large quantities of purins.
to uric acid, about half of the uric acid produced in the body disappears
by the kidneys.

endogenous uric acid, or that produced by its own tissue change, together
strained by the larger quantity introduced in flesh-food or any other food
this uric acid.
possesses less of this property; alkalinity of the blood is thought to be
nature acts contrarily.
 Alexander Haig writes "I consider that every
and also drinks acid wine or beer, will, by the time he is 50, have
much more; and about this time, owing to the large amount of uric acid in
chronic rheumatism.
 Haig ascribes to the presence of uric acid in the
bodily depression, diseases of the liver, kidneys, brain, etc.

is that uric acid is not a cause, but a symptom of gout, that uric acid is
healthy subject.
previously stated hypothesis, are as follows:--Birds very rarely suffer
which have been ascribed to gout, are of tuberculous origin--yet their
their excretion is mainly urates.
expect the disease to be common in birds.
waste nitrogen should be excreted in the form of uric acid or urates from
 Birds
movements and consume a large amount of food proportionate to their
 They live, as it were, at high pressure.
hand, have a low body temperature, they are lethargic and can live a long
 There is no obvious reason why some animals excrete
 As uric acid is a satisfactory and
active alert bird, as well as from the slow moving reptile, it is
 Many
 Uratic
occurrence of any pain or paroxysms.
amounts into the bodies of animals as well as administered in their food
 The
gouty complaints, have failed to show uric acid in the excretions in
acute attack.
subjects; some eminent medical men say it is in the highest degree
destruction, but to defective excretion by the kidneys.
arise from failure of the uric acid to enter into combination with a
kidneys.
disturbances in the gastro-intestinal tract and nutritive organs, whose
and in well developed cases by deposits in the tissues.
are so many different causes, curative treatments, theories,
 There are good reasons for believing
 In the urine it is in

acid, but can take up more, and that the alkalinity of the blood is not
 The excess over the normal is in many cases small; it is said
found in leukaemia.
permanent increase in the white blood corpuscles and consequent
 Neither does the uric acid of gout reach the quantity
medical purposes.
gout present.
copious precipitate of urates, yet without any observed effect on them.

is this which produces the lesions; the deposition of urates in the joints
 This poison is probably of bacterial origin, derived from
 This is due to faulty
constipation.
food, is so bad.
to stagnate and become a mass of bacteria and putrefaction, gives off
 This bacterial poison
 Because of the
from their food, they require to eat a larger quantity; this gives a
 The
ancestors, whose food consisted of bulky, fibrous and slowly digested
 It was more useful then, than now that most of our food
 About a third part of the fæcal matter consists of
_bacillus coli communis_, one of the less harmful kind which is a constant
 This species is
part of the food of the herbivora.
the bacteria of putrefaction find a congenial home.
ptomaines, fatty acids and even true toxins are produced.
that there exists in the colons of gouty persons, either conditions more
less able to resist the effect of the poisons produced.
been found that milk is a very good food for gouty patients.
due to its being little liable to putrefaction, the bacterial fermentation
 The
or entirely stopped by acids slightly alkaline media are most favourable.
This explains how it is that milk will often stop diarrhoea.

 Haig condemns pulse and some other vegetable foods, because, he says,
 Pulse, he states, contains twice as much as most
 Vegetable foods, however, contain no uric acid and meat
 The proper term to use is purins or nucleins.
Dr.
correct results.
deductions therefrom, and have given up the use of valuable foods in
 We therefore give some of the analyses of Dr.
 Walker Hall,
" The determination of the purins
 Dr.
investigating and improving the methods of others, and his figures may be

The first column of figures indicates purin bodies in parts per 1,000, the

The following showed no traces of purins: white bread, rice, cabbage,
 Milk showed a very small quantity, and

The researches of Dr.
broken down by gouty patients, almost as well as by normal individuals,
 A portion
particular purin and the vigour of the digestive organs.
the purin hypoxanthin given to them daily, in quantities which if given to
respectively.
degenerative changes were visible in their liver and kidneys.
 Hall has
taken large doses of purin bodies--such as 7 grains of hypoxanthin, 15 to
symptoms of general malaise and irritability have frequently appeared.
gouty subjects such moderate or small quantities of purins which are
the already weakened liver and kidneys.

all agreed that food containing an excess of purin bodies should be
dietetics.
 Salicylic acid is a
 Alkalies in every form are utterly useless.
 J.
Woods-Hutchinson says, "the one element which has been found to be of the
lith¾mia, water, would act most admirably upon a toxic condition from any
the liver, kidneys and skin secondarily; and secondly, by supplying to the
discharge their functions.
 Woods-Hutchinson proceeds to state, that
more or less than the water.
to be pure moonshine.
suggestion--not to say humbug--aided, of course, by the pure air of the
"
It is a common experience amongst rheumatic patients, that they cannot
are inadmissible.
purins, or as some misname it, uric acid; but because the digestive organs
 It will be seen, that although Dr.
hypothesis of uric acid as a cause of gout and some other diseases is
other foods which contain purins, and also pulse, which is difficult of
 It has proved of the greatest

Digestion and nutrition is a complex process, and it may be faulty at
excessive secretions or inaction.
symptoms, including an excessive quantity of urates in the urine, have
_Lancet_, 1900, I.
 1, and 1903, I.
 1059).

referred to the lecture on "The meaning of uric acid and the urates," by
 Woods-Hutchinson, in the _Lancet_, 1903, I.
 288, and the
Association at Oxford (see _British Medical Journal_, 1904, II.
 740).

 George S.
rheumatic fever; he says that the disease is much more common than it was
 He has never met with it in the young or old except when
has been on the outlook for at least forty years for a case of the disease
 He speaks of it as
Republic, amongst the young; and that it leads to most of the heart
 The amount of meat, especially of beef, consumed by old and
 The main evils there, were anæmia in children and
 Dr.
migraine all his life, until the time of his discontinuing butchers' meat.
As meat contains a comparatively large quantity of purins and other bodies
effect, quite apart from the question of uric acid production.
excessive meat diet lessens the vitality of the body and pre-disposes to
about.

--We have written at some length on the quantity
accepted standards.
subject by Mr.
B.
 of our own
A.
, New York).
writing of the book, when of the age of 4, he was fast becoming a physical
active and most agreeable life.
disorder that made him ineligible as an insurance risk.
disability and warning was so much a shock, that it led to his making a
 He concluded that he took too much
 His practice and advice is, be sure that
 If true
if you have to wait till noon.
everything you take in your mouth; until it is not only thoroughly
substance all settles back in the folds at the back of the mouth and
 Then
chew at the remainder, liquid though it be, until the last morsel
 In a very short time
 Mr.
been under the observation of several eminent scientific men.
R.
 Chittenden, of Yale University, in his report refers to the
that men may live and thrive, for a time at least, on amounts of proteid
the Voit standard (see p.
calories of the food intake.
called forth critical comment from writers reluctant to depart from the

Dr.
months past, a gentleman (H.
) who for some five years, practised a
economy with, as he believes, great gain, in bodily and mental vigour and
 The gentleman in question
consumed by most individuals.
he was under observation in Professor Chittenden's laboratory.
amount of proteid metabolised was 41.
pounds) remaining practically constant.
an output of an equivalent quantity of nitrogen.
thorough series of observations was made.
consisted merely of a prepared cereal food, milk and maple sugar.
diet was taken twice a day for seven days, and was selected by the subject
taste.
but the subject took each day such amounts of the above foods as his
 The daily average in grammes was, proteid 44.
58
0, carbohydrates 253.
 The total intake
19, while the output was 6.
 It may be asked,
the body--sufficient for a man weighing 165 pounds? In reply, it may be
to take more food if he so desired.
constant and the nitrogen of the intake and output were not far apart.
important point is, can a man on such food be fit for physical work? Mr.
Fletcher was placed under the guidance of Dr.
G.
of the gymnasium of Yale University.
 Anderson reports that on the four
 Fletcher was given the
 They are drastic
resulting.
to try the muscles of the limbs and trunk.
condensed form, is this: Mr.
and with fewer noticeable bad results than any man of his age and
" "To appreciate the full significance
Mr.
other than that involved in daily walks about town.
had Mr.
laboratories, and in his report he remarks on the waste products of the
that they are also markedly changed in character, becoming odourless and
in a healthier and more aseptic condition than is the case under ordinary
 If we can obtain sufficient nourishment, as Mr.
does, on half the usual quantity of food, we diminish by half the
 By thorough mastication the

blocking up of the lower intestines with a mass of incompletely digested
 Even where there is
portion only, being expelled at a time, one or more days after its proper
 All this improved condition of the digestive tract, leaves more
clearness of brain.

H.
writes:--"Our results, obtained with a great variety of subjects, justify
under ordinary conditions of life, are far below the generally accepted
taste of the generality of mankind.
and physical vigour and endurance can be maintained with at least one-half
"
From these and other considerations, we see that it is not only
standards, such as that of Voit, or even to any other standard, until they
 We shall probably find that as the body
necessary.
ordinary, not over manfactured vegetable foods, such as are generally
 Several cookery books have been
more or less fanciful requirements; these give the quantities and kinds of
 Theoretically, this
of the eater and the work he or she has to perform.
have seen have their proteid ratio placed unnecessarily high.
proteid ratio can be got by the use of the pulses, but except in small
they are ruled out.
cheese and milk.
a weakness and want of confidence in the sufficiency of vegetable foods.
Some of these cookery books are of use in sickness, especially as

palatable to those who have not quite overcome a yearning for flesh and
 The liberal use of animal products is less likely to

giving up flesh foods.

--One of the most remarkable habits of these times is
 It is in all ordinary
food, even in a largely sold wheat flour, and often in pastry.
to nearly all savoury vegetable food, and many persons, not content, add
 No dinner table is considered complete
 Some take even threequarters of an
 The question is not, of course, whether salt
existing in our foods.
between added salt and that natural to raw foods.
inorganic, non-assimilable and even poisonous; whilst the latter is
 The writer is far from
 Some herbivorous
 This has been
whilst sodium chloride is the principal saline constituents of blood and
 In their food, the herbivora take three or four times as much
 Of course, the sodium chloride in the flesh
forming their food, and very few of them have the opportunity of obtaining
 They must have the power of
the potash salts pass away.
are worse off by being deprived of salt.
without added salt why should not man? Bunge considers that a restriction
 Opposed to this, is the
vegetable food wood ashes or a preparation of wood ashes; this is chiefly
 One preparation used in British Central Africa was found to
 of potassium chloride to only 0.
 of
 It has been said that vegetarians consume more salt than
 We doubt this; we know of many vegetarians who
years.
other symptoms.
salty; the writer on this account cannot partake of their savoury dishes,
 Nearly all who patronise these restaurants are
for.
a considerable quantity of sodium chloride; and most flesh eaters are also
 These people are accustomed to a
flavoured unseasoned vegetable foods.
discontinued the use of added salt, and lost any craving for it, can know
thought to be nearly tasteless, unless seasoned, are found to have very
 It is then perceived, that there is a much greater
 It is commonly urged
stimulate the digestive functions.
condiments are the cause of much over-eating; and that if food cannot be
system, and it is better to abstain from food until the appearance of a
 An excess of salt creates thirst and means
expulsion.
little sodium salts, a very little salt added to such food would be
great variety of foods.
the kidneys originate in excessive salt eating; certain it is that
a dietary free from added salt and also poor in naturally contained sodium
 It is also possible to cause the swelling of the legs
will, by withdrawing and afterwards resuming salt-containing foods.
quantity of one-third of an ounce, added to the usual diet, has after a
 In one patient, on a diet
oedemia disappeared and the albumin in the urine diminished.
are particularly rich in potash salts, this case is significant, as
not the irritating effect of added common salt.
have been shown by several observers, to be injurious, not only in
 In these
of fluid into them, and so produces oedema and favours the increase of
 The good effect of milk in such diseases has long been known; it

extremely rich in chlorides to one deficient, they were able to reduce the
 (4 lbs.
); this was by the loss
 Sodium chloride
potassium salts, on the contrary, do not, they may even increase the
 Although nearly all the medical experience recorded has to do with
suppose, that more than a very small quantity of salt in excess of that
ordinarily healthy individual.

--Enjoyment of food is dependent upon appetite quite as much as
 Better a simple repast with good appetite
 There is indeed a causal
 The savage likes the noise of
to the trained ear of the musician.
of scenery or of animal life, except as in respect to their power of
 What an
 In the case of the painter, his eye and
 Man has improved
 From a wild grass he has
 Vegetables of all kinds have
 In tropical and
cultivation is of less importance than in temperate regions.
inhabited or wild, temperate and cold regions, in times past, when deer
obtained at less labour; or such intelligence and industry as is required

improves its flavour.
mild vegetable foods, especially if uncooked.
flesh but vegetable foods, were more and more subjected to cooking and
killed.
increase the flavour, or less frequently to produce an imagined greater
 Man has taken that which seemed most
principles, by that which is really best.
said that there is such a thing as a science of dietetics; although
 Of recent years many diseases
 Digestive
nervous complaints, heart disease, baldness and a host of other diseases
 One of the most learned and
book on "The Nature of Man," referring to the variety of food and its
old age and that the simpler food of the uncivilised races is better.
.

restaurants of the rich, stimulate the organs of digestion and secretion
 It would be true progress to abandon modern cuisine and
" A few have lived to a
reason why all men, apart from accident, should not do so.
old at 70, some even at 60; if we could add 20 or 30 years to our lives,
 Instead of a man being in his prime, a
would have the same physical and mental vigour to 80 or 90 or even longer.
This later period would be the most valuable part of his life, as he would
earlier period.

back to nature, to eat natural food.
 To speak of
living according to their own instinct and reason, uninterfered with, in
 The phrase, applied to man, is either meaningless, or has
 If it has any definite
instincts; to cast off all the artifices of civilisation, to give up all
with enormous labour, through countless failures and successes, during
savagery--even the savages known to us use art in fashioning their arms,
 Civilised
is as natural for him to clothe himself as for a cow to eat grass.
intellect has been made to wait on our animal nature, whilst our spiritual
 Animal food and all else of a stimulating
whilst mild food makes it easier to lead a pure life.
habitual drunkards in retreats, it has been found that a permanent cure is
 Only by the use of vegetable
 The
 R.
a vegetarian diet.
heavy smoker for more than 30 years, using not less than eight ounces of
tobacco nearly gone.
smoking half-an-ounce a day.
nearly so fond of it.
drink it, "it tastes like physic.
me as a revelation.
national intemperance is not teetotal propaganda, but vegetarianism.

as food, but higher than these are those relating to ethics.
relating to the slaughter-house is revolting to a refined and humane
 In the great slaughter-houses of Chicago; in those huge hideous
animals are killed every year.
merchandise and as destitute of feeling.
with a mallet and let fall into the basement of the building.
whilst stunned or half-stunned, at once strung up by their hind legs to

followed by others with great pails to catch the blood.
blood is spilt over the men or on the floors; but this is of no
 In a short
lowest and darkest and worst ventilated portion of the gloomy building,
 The walls and floors are caked with blood, the
both to eyes and nose is detestable.
light could not penetrate into the centre of the buildings.
large part of the work is done by artificial light.
prevalent amongst the workpeople living under such unsanitary conditions.
Serious crime is much more common amongst them than amongst any other

We English-speaking people, who pride ourselves on our civilisation and
of Peace; yet hunt, shoot, trap and torture animals for food sport and
 Our main reason for eating flesh is that of personal
 We are loath to admit that the lower animals have any
 Those Eastern peoples who are adherents to the teachings of the
 Mr.
 Fielding, who lived many years
against the sale of beef, yet no respectable Burman will even now, kill
 No life at all may be taken by him who keeps to
 "He
kindness and sympathy--that nothing of great value can exist without them.
Do you think that a Burmese boy would be allowed to birds'-nest or worry
 These would be crimes.
this kindess and compassion for animals has very far-reaching results, no
 If you are kind to animals, you will be kind, too, to your
"
By participating in any form of cruelty or injustice, not only to our
the higher life, the subtler forces in man cannot find their full

 INORGANIC NATURE.

 THE CONSTITUTION OF NATURE.

 iii.
 129.

erect a boundary, we are compelled to think of space as existing
  Thus by the incessant dissolution of limits we arrive at a
  But, though
compelling us to think of it either as filled or empty; whether it is
  That it is
remains, Are the stars themselves hung in vacuo?  Are the vast
propagated, absolutely empty?  A century ago the answer to this
particles of light are incessantly shot through space.
modern science is also negative, but on different grounds.
best possible reasons for rejecting the idea of luminiferous
are occupied by matter, it is able to offer proofs almost as cogent as
earth.
universal atmosphere through the study of the terrestrial and local
  From the phenomena of sound, as displayed in the air, they
is the name given to the interstellar medium.

fanciful conception on the part of scientific men.
most of them are as convinced as they are of the existence of the sun
  The luminiferous aether has definite mechanical properties.
It is almost infinitely more attenuated than any known gas, but its
  It resembles
  This was not the first conception of the
its phenomena.
although the aether may not be co-extensive with space, it must at all
  In fact it is

conveys them with inconceivable rapidity to our organs of vision.
is the transported shiver of bodies countless millions of miles
splendour of the firmament at night.

conceived to exist beyond it, but they could emit no light.
the aether dark suns might burn; there, under proper conditions,
be fused in invisible fires.
would continue for ever heated; a sun or planet once molten, would
  For, the loss of heat being simply the
absent no cooling could occur.
heated body in this region, would be conscious of no augmentation of
  The gradations of warmth dependent on the laws of
heat of an extra ethereal sun.

  From it,
approached the place of disturbance would be met by stronger and
  This gradual augmentation of the impression made upon
approach a luminous source.
common nerves of the body suffice; for the other we must have the
  But suppose the water withdrawn; the action at a
concerned, the wader would be first rendered conscious of the motion
  The transference of motion
transference of molecular motion from the heated body to the aether;
similar to the propagation of light and radiant heat.

holder of the luminiferous aether, through which are interspersed, at

planetary masses revolving at various distances round it, each again
planets we have dark bodies of minor note--the moons.
other fixed stars have similar planetary companions or not is to us a
conception of the universe.
believes, with regard to those distant suns, that there is, in space,

From this general view of the present condition of space, and of the
created at the beginning.
Omnipotence, with these burning orbs?  In presence of the revelations
  Behind the orbs, we now
  And without
out of common non-luminous matter this whole pomp of stars might have

The law of gravitation enunciated by Newton is, that every particle of
which diminishes as the square of the distance increases.
sun and the earth mutually pull each other; thus the earth and the
of masses together being the integrated force of their component
  Under the operation of this force a stone falls to the ground
our atmosphere and rise to incandescence.
doubtless fall incessantly upon the sun.
earth, were it stopped in its orbit to-morrow, would rush towards, and
  Heat would also be developed by this
  Mayer first, and Helmholtz and Thomson afterwards, have
  It would equal that produced by the combustion
at the instant of collision.
acting upon non-luminous matter, we have a source of heat more
  And
space, and there abandoned to the mutual gravitation of its own parts,
the stars.

origin of all light and heat, and also the proximate source of such
  But we have now to
question has already been answered in a general way.
heat are modes of motion.
motion, considered as that of masses, is destroyed, but it is in great
  It is this
a velocity of 186,000 miles a second, that comes to us as the light
  The atoms of a hot body swing with
of vibration necessarily implies the operation of forces between the
  It reveals to us that while they are held together
moment depending on the equilibrium of attraction and repulsion.
atoms behave as if connected by elastic springs, which oppose at the
vibration called heat.
instantly shared with the aether, and diffused by it throughout space.

commotion.
  The cloud canopy above us may
itself a warm body, which radiates its thermal motion through the
  The earth also is warm, and sends its heat-pulses incessantly
  It is the waste of its molecular motion in space that chills
the clouds which prevents the earth's temperature, on a cloudy night,
  To the conception of space being filled, we must
tremor.

universe.

liquids, and gases.
two last, would also assume the solid form.
of these, we generally find it composed of still more elementary
  We learn, for example, that the water of our rivers is formed
hydrogen.
form water: we also know how to analyse the water, and recover from it
  So, likewise, as regards the solid portions of
  Our chalk hills, for example, are formed by a combination
  These are the so-called elements the
of chalk.
oxygen and silicium, called silica; and our ordinary clay is, for the
light metal, aluminium.
crust is compounded of the elementary substances mentioned in these

The principle of gravitation has been already described as an
every other particle.
particular atoms choose, by preference, other particular atoms as
simply to the quantity of the attracting matter, regardless of its
  But in the molecular world which we have now entered matters
  Here we have atoms between which a strong
attraction is exercised.
in virtue of a superior force of attraction.
of force exerted varies thus from atom to atom, it is still an
that of gravity itself.
way, namely by the amount of motion which it can generate in a certain
  Thus the attraction of gravity at the earth's surface is
a second of time, gravity imparts to the body a velocity of thirty-two
  In like manner the mutual attraction of oxygen and
their rushing together.
not here to be thought of, the whole interval required by the atoms to
inconceivably small fraction of a second.

the shock.
_mechanical_ combination of the earth and the body.
falling body and the earth to dwindle in imagination to the size of
chemical affinity; we have then what is called a chemical combination.
The effect of the union in this case also is the development of heat,
the atomic pull.
enormous.
spark through the mixture; the gases instantly combine, their atoms
  Take a weight
surface, and let it fall; the energy with which it will strike the
they dash against one pound of hydrogen atoms to form water.

forces by the fact of its resisting conversion into other forms of
  Chemical affinity, it is said, can be converted into heat and
refuses to be so converted; being a force maintaining itself under all
another.
  If by it be
the assertion is correct; but the law which affirms the convertibility
understood it, to affirm that such a conversion as that here implied
  As regards convertibility into heat,


the mutual attraction of the earth and stone is abolished; nobody
ceases, after the atoms have combined to form water.
in the case of chemical affinity, is, that the pull of that affinity,
one atom towards the other.
that produces it heat.
motion of translation is converted into a motion of vibration, which
  The vibration, however, so far from causing the extinction

contact, and in the recoil they are driven too far back.
attraction then triumphs over the force of recoil, and urges the atoms
  Thus, like a pendulum, they oscillate, until
words, until their heat becomes radiant heat.

into heat.
there is, secondly, space between them.
attraction urges them.

loss.
  To produce motion by
  When
there is no destruction.
the shock; by their own perfect elasticity these atoms recoil; and
the proper nerves, announces itself as heat.

unelastic bodies force was destroyed.
two spheres of clay, painter's putty, or lead for example, were urged
more or less annihilated.
the force of impact.
experienced in believing this, whereas, at present, the ideas of force
  In
the motion with which they clashed together was in great part restored
more complete being the restitution.
perfectly elastic bodies--bodies competent to restore by their recoil
again to the idea of the _conservation_ of force, as opposed to that
met in collision.

elastic and unelastic bodies.
no heat on collision.
though its direction might be changed; and it is only when sensible
  This
exact equivalent of the sensible motion extinguished.
virtually declares that the property of elasticity, denied to the
which the principle of conservation is vindicated.

more felt as we proceed.
force, without any reference to motion.
as much pulled by gravity as when, after having been pushed off the
  We applied the term force also to
  When,
collision, we meant neither a pull nor a push, which, as just
invested in motion--the _vis viva_, as it is called, of the colliding

Force in this form has a definite mechanical measure, in the amount of
  The simplest form of work is the raising of
  A man walking up-hill, or up-stairs, with a pound weight in
amount of work, over and above the lifting of his own body.
carries the pound to a height of thirty-two feet, he does twice the
work; if to sixty-four feet, he does four times the work, and so on.
If, moreover, he carries up two pounds instead of one, other things
he does three, four, or five times the work.
that the work performed depends on two factors, the weight raised and
  It is expressed by the product of

But a body may be caused to reach a certain elevation in opposition to
  If a hodman,
above the place where he stood, he would probably pitch it up to the
  He would thus impart, by a sudden effort, a velocity to
accomplished by that effort being precisely the same as if he had
  The initial velocity to be imparted, in
  To reach a height of sixteen feet, the
second.
velocity, would, if wholly unopposed or unaided, continue to move for
  But when, as in the case before us, the
incessantly retards its motion, and finally brings it to rest at an
  If not here caught by the bricklayer, it
hand with the precise velocity it possessed on quitting it.

out.
starting, a velocity of sixty-four feet a second, or twice its former
the first instance?  No; it would be four times that quantity; for a
times the height.
nine-fold elevation, a four-fold velocity will give a sixteen-fold
  The height attained, then, is not proportional
  As
  Hence
virtue of the motion which it at any moment possesses, is jointly
  Here,
the idea of height into its equivalent idea of motion.

of its velocity, expresses what is called the _vis viva_, or living
  It is also sometimes called the 'mechanical effect.
example, a cannon pointed to the zenith urge a ball upwards with twice
times the height attained by the latter.
target, it will also do four times the execution.
importance of imparting a high velocity to projectiles in war.
thus cleared our way to a perfectly definite conception of the _vis
heat generated by the shock of a falling body against the earth is
  The heat is proportional to
  In the case, therefore, of two
velocity of the other, it will generate four times the heat, if with
on.

 Joule has shown that a pound weight falling from a height of 772
collision with the earth an amount of heat sufficient to raise a pound
  772 "foot-pounds"
  Now, a body falling
223 feet a second; and if this velocity were imparted to the body, by
motion would be that stated above.
feet, would not be an inordinate one for a cannon-ball as it quits the
  Hence, a cannon-ball moving with a velocity of 1,338 feet a
raise its own weight of water 36 degrees Fahrenheit in temperature.
composed of iron, and if all the heat generated were concentrated in
Fahrenheit; because one degree in the case of water is equivalent to
  In artillery practice, the
on the portion of the target first struck.
heat developed becomes sufficiently intense to raise the dust of the
with the target.

the cannon-ball.
burnt in the open air would yield a certain amount of heat.
not yield this amount if it perform the work of urging a ball.
heat then generated by the gunpowder will fall short of that produced
and this exact amount is restored by the ball on its collision with
  In this perfect way are heat and mechanical motion

Broadly enunciated, the principle of the conservation of force
as the quantity of matter; that it is alike impossible to create force
  But in what sense are we to understand this
gravity as defined by Newton; for this is a force varying inversely as
force would be self-contradictory.
understood, gravity forms no exception to the law of conservation.
Following the method pursued by Helmholtz, I will here attempt an
  Though destined in its
difficult of comprehension.

which we may call F, to be perfectly fixed, and a second movable
  We will assume that these
  At a
which might be determined by means of a spring balance.
distance the attraction would be augmented four times; at a third of
times, and so on.
determining, with the spring balance, the amount of tension just
  Thus far we have
dynamics.
the _pull_ exerted by gravity at that distance.

a line of a certain length, a force of double magnitude being
  Placing then the
straight line from D to F, and at D erect a perpendicular to this

small, and the perpendicular consequently very short.
be practically infinite, the attraction is practically _nil_.
now suppose at every point in the line joining F and D a perpendicular
that point; we thus obtain an infinite number of perpendiculars, of
  Uniting the ends of
and the straight line joining F and D we have an area containing all
  Each one of this infinite
is sometimes called, the area just referred to represents the sum of
first position to F.

motion.
contemplation of D and F.
practically infinite distance from F; here, as stated, the pull of
it would dwindle almost to a point.
tensions capable of being exerted on D would be a maximum.
begin to move in obedience to the infinitesimal attraction exerted
  Motion being once set up, the idea of _vis viva_ arises.
moving towards F the particle D consumes, as it were, the tensions.
Let us fix our attention on D, at any point of the path over which it
  Between that point and F there is a quantity of unused
we have in their place an equivalent quantity of _vis viva_.
has passed any point, the tension previously in store at that point
duration of its action, a due amount of motion to that previously
  The nearer D approaches to F, the smaller is the sum
farther D is from F, the greater is the sum of the unconsumed
  Now the principle of
gravity, nor yet the constancy of the _vis viva_, taken separately, but
  At the
close to F the _vis viva_ is a maximum, while the tension area is zero.
At every other point, the work-producing power of the particle D

If gravity, instead of being attraction, were repulsion, then, with
would be a maximum, and the _vis viva_ zero.
repulsion, D moved away from F, _vis viva_ would be generated; and the
less the amount of tension still available for producing motion.
Taking repulsion as well as attraction into account, the principle of
_tensions_ and _vires vivae_ of the material universe, so far as we know
  The universe, in short, possesses two
  The diminution of
of the property remaining unchanged.

affinity.
but by the application of proper means they may be caused to rush
  While this space
other, we have tensions and nothing else.
each other the tensions, as in the case of gravity, are converted into
  After they clash we have still _vis viva_, but in another
  It _was_ translation, it _is_ vibration.
transfer, it _is_ heat.

atoms and replace them in their first positions.
this, as much heat would be required as was generated by their union.
Such reversals occur daily and hourly in nature.
the oxygen of water is divorced from its hydrogen in the leaves of
  As molecular _vis viva_ the waves disappear, but in so doing
  The
the precise amount of heat consumed in their separation.
remarks apply to the compound of carbon and oxygen, called carbonic
found sparingly diffused everywhere throughout the air.
of plants the sunbeams also wrench the atoms of carbonic acid asunder,
the amount of heat consumed in their production is restored.


from _vis viva_ to tension.
system.
occupied by the sun.
the orbit.
minimum.
sun.
consumed, an equivalent amount of _vis viva_ being generated.
nearest to the sun the motion, and consequently the _vis viva_, reach a
  But here the available tensions have been used up.
earth rounds this portion of the curve and retreats from the sun.
Tensions are now stored up, but _vis viva_ is lost, to be again restored
curve.
diminution of its total stock of force.

mind of the reader upon things rather than upon names.
are essential; and here, as yet, we are not provided with such.
have had the force of gravity and living force--two utterly distinct
  We have had pulls and tensions; and we might have had the
force of electricity--all of which terms have been employed more or
  This confusion is happily avoided
and _vis viva_.
then actual, and we agree to call it actual or dynamic energy.
our old _vis viva_.
in motion, but which, in virtue of attraction or repulsion, possess a
removed.
surface in a position from which it cannot fall to a lower one
  It has neither motion nor power of motion.
the same body suspended at a height above the earth has a power of
  Energy is possible to
  It consists
  We, moreover, speak of the conservation of
the potential and dynamic energies of the material universe is a

A body cast upwards consumes the actual energy of projection, and lays
  When it reaches its utmost height all its actual
  When

the lowest point of its arc its energy is all actual.
resting on a mountain slope has potential energy; loosened, and
  The
the _Holzrinne_ of the woodcutters they possess actual energy.
is true of the mountains themselves.
compose them can fall to a lower level, they possess potential energy,
and hands them over to the action of gravity.
the Matterhorn and Weisshorn are illustrations in point.
of the great bell of Westminster, when raised before striking,
and after the stroke, we have the rhythmic play of potential and
  The same holds good for the
  An atom is driven against
  The ultimate amplitude of the recoil
and for an instant its energy is all potential.
towards its neighbour with accelerated speed; thus, by attraction,
  Its motion in this
energy is all potential.
repulsion, its potential into dynamic energy, till the latter attains

yearly journey round the sun, is also true of her minutest atom.
have wheels within wheels, and rhythm within rhythm.

occurs, and to produce this change heat is consumed.
only of the heat communicated to the body remains as dynamic energy.
Looking back on some of the statements made at the beginning of this
necessity of qualifying them.
heat is generated; but the heat, or molecular dynamic energy,
the sensible dynamic energy destroyed.
heat, plus the potential energy conferred upon the molecules by the
  This molecular potential

Wherever two atoms capable of uniting together by their mutual

atmospheric oxygen on the other, constitute a vast store of energy of
  We have, besides our
the earth's crust.
so far as they go, stores of energy.
mass of the earth's crust are already satisfied, and from them no
  Ages ago the elementary
heat, which was taken up by the aether and carried away through
  It is lost for ever as far as we are concerned.
those ages the hot conflict of carbon, oxygen, and calcium produced
carbon, oxygen, and calcium no further energy can be derived.
is with almost all the other constituents of the earth's crust.
took their present form in obedience to molecular force; they turned
the universe, ages before man appeared upon this planet.
residue of potential energy remains, vast, truly, in relation to the
with the earth's primitive store.

  The whole stock of energy or working-power in the world
  If the attractions
they are sources of working-power, but not otherwise.
moment ago, the attraction exerted between the earth and a body at a
because the body can be moved by the attraction, and in falling can
  When it rests at its lowest level it is not a source of
  But though it has
as a _force_, which holds the earth and weight together.

  As long as
attraction; and the motion thus produced may, by proper appliances, be
  When, for example, two atoms of
drawn towards each other--they move, they clash, and then by virtue of
  To this quivering motion we
  This atomic vibration is merely the
this is the only sense in which chemical affinity can be said to be
  We must not imagine the chemical attraction
  For the atoms, when
very attraction which first drew them towards each other.
has really been expended is the _pull_ exerted through the space by

If this be understood, it will be at once seen that gravity, as before
that it is in reality no more an outstanding and inconvertible agent,
  By the
to clash with a certain definite velocity against the earth.
thereby developed, and this is the only sense in which gravity can be
  In no case is the _force_, which
  The
contact, as when they were separate but the ability of that attraction

The transformation, in this case, is easily followed by the mind's
  First, the weight as a whole is set in motion by the attraction
  This motion of the mass is arrested by collision with the
name of heat.

raise a weight--which is done through the intermediation of an elastic
motion is consumed.
heat be said to be converted into gravity; or, more correctly, into
  Here the destruction of the heat has
it a power of exerting a certain definite pull, between the

When, therefore, writers on the conservation of energy speak of
that old attractions have been annihilated, and new ones brought into
produce motion has been diminished by the shortening of the distance
producing motion has been augmented by the increase of the distance.
These remarks apply to all bodies, whether they be sensible masses or

Of the inner quality that enables matter to attract matter we know
quality.
only the constancy of working-power.
of MOTION; or it may exist in the form of FORCE, _with distance to act
  The former is dynamic energy, the latter is potential
conservation.
transformations of dynamic into potential, and of potential into
  In no other sense has the convertibility of force any

Grave errors have been entertained as to what is really intended to be
  This exposition I hope

********************
II.

[Footnote: The Rede Lecture delivered in the Senate House before the
]
*****
1.

BETWEEN the mind of man and the outer world are interposed the nerves
the impressions of that world into facts of consciousness and thought.

impressions.
are we rendered sensible of sound by the nerves of the tongue.
the general assemblage of physical actions, each nerve, or group of
is specially organised.

there spreads out, to form the retina, a web of nerve filaments, on
portion of the eye.
phenomena of radiation, and, notwithstanding its marvellous
obtuse to other impressions.


while others never reach it at all, being absorbed by the humours of
  To all rays which, whether they reach the retina or not,

  There is no body in nature
heat.
certain temperature is necessary.
remains dark for a time, but when its temperature has become equal to
  In like manner, if
through a wire of the refractory metal platinum, the wire first
still however remaining obscure; at length we can no longer touch the
feeble red light.
in brilliancy, until finally the wire appears of a dazzling white.
light which it now emits is similar to that of the sun.

light, and by the same simple instrument we can investigate the
  In passing through the prism
from their straight course; and, as different rays are differently
rays from another.
 Draper has shown,
sensibly red.
but at the same time orange rays are added to the emission.
the temperature still further, yellow rays appear beside the orange;
succession, blue, indigo, and violet rays.
colours at the same time the platinum wire must be _white-hot_: the
action of all these colours on the optic nerve.

ordinary temperature, and gradually raised it to a white heat.
beginning, and even before the electric current had acted at all upon
  For some time after the action
become intolerable to the touch, its radiation was still invisible.
The question now arises, What becomes of these invisible rays when the
that they maintain themselves in the radiation; that a ray once
hence the emission from our platinum wire, even when it has attained
rays.
to incandescence, the obscure radiation which it now emits would
  To reach incandescence the planet would have
final emission would embrace the rays of all these stages.
hardly be a doubt that from the sun itself, rays proceed similar in
  In fact,
system are included in the present radiation of the sun.


into its coloured constituents; he formed what is technically called
  Exposing thermometers to the successive colours
violet or most refracted end, to the red or least refracted end of the
  But he did not stop here.
the dark space beyond the red he found that, though the light had
intense than that at any visible part of the spectrum.
William Herschel showed, and his results have been verified by various
pours forth a multitude of other rays, more powerfully calorific than

At the less refrangible end of the solar spectrum, then, the range of
  The same
  Ritter discovered the
and, in recent times, this ultra-violet emission has had peculiar
Stokes.
three distinct parts: first, of ultra-red rays of high heating power,
which display the succession of colours, red, orange, yellow, green,
ultra-red ones, are incompetent to excite vision, but which, unlike
  In
are of the utmost importance to the organic world.


  Origin and Character of Radiation.

When we see a platinum wire raised gradually to a white heat, and
conscious of a series of changes in the condition of our own eyes.
do not see the actions in which these successive colours originate,
corresponds to certain contemporaneous changes in the wire.
the nature of these changes?  In virtue of what condition does the
its constituent atoms.
electric current has begun to act upon them, we should find them in a
  In this vibration, indeed, consists such warmth
  Locke enunciated this idea with great
excellent quantitative researches of Mr.
  'Heat,' says Locke,
which produce in us that sensation from which we denominate the object
_motion_.
through the wire, its first act is to intensify the vibrations already

increased.
periods of the old vibrations, or the times in which they were
  But besides intensifying the old vibrations the current
rapidity has been attained, the wire begins to glow.
exhibited is red, which corresponds to the lowest rate of vibration of
  By augmenting the strength
orange rays appear.
still quicker green; and by further augmenting the rapidity, we pass

Such are the changes recognised by the mind in the wire itself, as
  But what
intelligence of its varying condition to the optic nerve?  Heat being
of an object,' it is readily conceivable that on touching a heated
announce itself to them as light or heat.
not touch the hot platinum, and hence the pertinence of the question,

physical conceptions that the mind of man has yet achieved: the
transmission of the vibrations of light and heat, as air is fitted for
  This medium is called the _luminiferous
  Every vibration of every atom of our platinum wire raises in
miles a second.

the inter-molecular spaces of the various humours are filled with it;
humours and impinge on the optic nerve at the back of the eye.
[Footnote: The action here described is analogous to the passage of
]
motion.
subsequent translation of the shock of the aethereal waves into
  As an oar dipping into the
disturbance, finally stir the sedges on the river's bank, so do the
finally stir the filaments of the retina.
transmitted with measurable, and not very great velocity to the brain,
to unravel, the tremor of the nervous matter is converted into the

Darkness might then be defined as aether at rest; light as aether in
  But in reality the aether is never at rest, for in the

commingle.
coincide, oppose, and pass through each other, without confusion or
  Every star is seen across the entanglement of
  It is the ceaseless thrill
constitutes what we call the 'temperature of space.
room accommodates itself to the requirements of an orchestra,
inter-stellar aether accommodate itself to the requirements of light
  Its waves mingle in space without disorder, each being
disturbed the universal repose.

'absorption' will now disappear.
vibratory motion to the aether; and when a body is said to be chilled
night, the meaning is, that the molecules of the grass have lost a
vibrate.
the molecules of a body exposed to their action as to yield up their
aether to the molecules consists the absorption of radiant heat.
the phenomena of heat are in this way reducible to interchanges of
motion, that we ourselves become conscious of the action of heat and

********************
3.

The word 'atoms' has been more than once employed in this discourse.
Chemists have taught us that all matter is reducible to certain
  These atoms are
circumstances they coalesce to form compounds.
hydrogen are elements when separate, or merely _mixed_, but they may be
of hydrogen and one of oxygen.
water.
gas, the latter a soft metal; and they unite together to form chloride
  In the same way the element nitrogen
three of the latter, to form ammonia.
atoms of elementary bodies as little spheres, the molecules of
  This is
  Now if this theory have any
and constituting the vehicle of atomic motion, be founded in fact, it
bodies are modified by the act of combination--whether as regards
communication of motion to the aether, and the acceptance of motion
that of the combined.


  Absorption of Radiant Heat by Gases.

they can be tried, namely, that of experiment.
defined as a question put to Nature; but, to avoid the risk of asking
necessarily belong to it.
elementary constituents, by the compounding of which all its varieties
  But, besides the chemical unions which they form, both
way.
change of their chemical nature.
transmission of radiant heat may be affected by the entanglement due
chemical union alone, we shall render our experiments more pure by
cohesion, and employing them in the gaseous or vaporous form.

problem now before us.
the phenomena of absorption, we have to picture a succession of waves
striking against the gaseous molecules and yielding up their motion to
intermolecular spaces without apparent hindrance.
us is to determine whether such free molecules have any power whatever
possess this power in different degrees.

work, choosing as the source of our heat-waves a plate of copper,
play.
pass through a space devoid of air, and then enter a hollow glass
  The two ends of this
which offers a scarcely sensible obstacle to the passage of the
  After passing through the tube, the radiant heat
the Appendix to the first chapter of 'Heat as a Mode of Motion,' the
] which
  This current
the deflection is a measure of the heat falling upon the pile.
famous instrument, and not an ordinary thermometer, is what we shall

at the same temperature, no matter how high that may be, there is no
  The current is a consequence of a difference of
  Hence, if
source, a second source, which we may call the compensating source, be
will tend to neutralise the former.
perfect, the magnetic needle connected with the pile is no longer
it hangs.

the heated plate of copper are passing, to be exhausted by an
opposite faces of the pile.
perfectly equal quantities of heat are imparted to the two faces, the
  Let any gas be now permitted to enter the
calorific waves, the equilibrium previously existing will be
the magnetic needle will be the immediate consequence.
deflections thus produced by different gases, we can readily deduce

In this way the substances mentioned in the following table were
tube.
depress a column of mercury associated with the tube one inch: in
an atmosphere.
of wave-motion absorbed by the respective gases, the quantity

Radiation through Gases.








     1,005
Nitric oxide           1,590
Nitrous oxide          1,860
Sulphide of hydrogen   2,100
Ammonia                5,460
Olefiant gas           6,030
Sulphurous acid        6,480
Every gas in this table is perfectly transparent to light, that is to
it without obstruction; but for the waves of slower period, emanating
power are manifested.
unexpected manner the influence of chemical combination.
elementary gases, oxygen, hydrogen, and nitrogen, and the mixture
every ray, or, more strictly speaking, for every unit of wave-motion,
intercepts 5,460 units, olefiant gas 6,030 units, while sulphurous
  What, becomes of the wave-motion thus

without absorption, and these gases are not sensibly changed in
  The position of

exist uncombined in the atmosphere; but the absorption of the compound

********************
5.

This extraordinary deportment of the elementary gases naturally
aggregation.
significance.
sulphur to be highly pervious to radiant heat; he had also proved that
carbon) were to a considerable extent transparent to calorific rays of
  These facts, harmonising so strikingly with the
  Sulphur
diathermic.
examined, and found competent to cut off the light of our most
with extreme freedom.
next thought of, but it was found impracticable to examine the
  It however dissolves freely
  There is no chemical union between the
uncombined atoms of the element can act upon the radiant heat.
permitted to do so, it was found that a layer of dissolved iodine,
absolutely transparent to the invisible calorific rays.
Professor Dewar has recently succeeded in producing a medium highly
together sulphur and iodine.

the non-luminous rays of the sun, and he also sought to render the
  Intercepting the luminous
ultra-red rays to a focus, but by this condensation he obtained no
  The solution of iodine offers a means of filtering the solar
attainable far more powerful foci of invisible rays than could
  For to
passed through a narrow slit or through a small aperture, the amount
  But with our
and having thus converged the rays, luminous and non-luminous, we can
latter.
solution, but also with black glass and layers of lampblack, were
and the effects at the foci of invisible rays, then obtained, were

In the experiments here referred to, glass lenses were employed to
  But glass, though highly transparent to the
the electric lamp, and hence a large portion of those rays was
  The obvious remedy here is to employ
lenses wholly, and to concentrate the rays by a metallic mirror.
of these improvements have been introduced, and, as anticipated, the
  The mode of
in 1862.
the thermoelectric pile to the focus of invisible rays, dashed the
  It is now found
combustible body, the invisible rays are competent to set that body on

********************
6.

We have next to examine what proportion the non-luminous rays of the
  This the opaque solution of
truth.

perfectly transparent to the luminous, and almost perfectly
  Supposing the
bisulphide, while through the solution of iodine only the dark rays
  If we determine, by means of a thermoelectric pile,
the value of the purely luminous emission.
this way, prove that if all the visible rays of the electric light
be one-eighth of that produced at the unseen focus of the invisible

Exposing his thermometers to the successive colours of the solar
and also that of the region beyond the extreme red.
straight line to represent the length of the spectrum, he erected, at
existing at those points.
he obtained a curve which showed at a glance the manner in which the
  Professor Müller of
experiments, and constructed a more accurate diagram of the same kind.
We have now to examine the distribution of heat in the spectrum of the
of the thermo-electric pile, devised by Melloni.
rectangle, which by means of movable side-pieces can be rendered as
  We can, for example, have the face of the pile the
 By
moved through the entire spectrum, from the violet to the red, the
being declared by a magnetic needle associated with the pile.

of the electric light, the heat is found to be insensible.
pile is gradually moved from the violet end towards the red, heat soon
  Of all the
power.
heat, instead of vanishing, rises suddenly and enormously in

rapidly than it rose.
distance beyond the red greater than the length of the whole visible

Drawing a datum line, and erecting along it perpendiculars,
points, we obtain the extraordinary curve, shown on the opposite page,
electric light.
shoots up to B, in a steep and massive peak--a kind of Matterhorn of
luminous radiation.
diagram is that the light rays are a mere insignificant appendage to
nature for the purpose of vision.

 Spectrum of Electric Light
The diagram drawn by Professor Müller to represent the distribution of
just described, and the reason, doubtless, is that prior to reaching
  By the
sun's invisible radiation is cut off.
mountain of invisible heat is observed when the rays from the electric
them as the atmospheric vapour acts upon the rays of the sun.


  Combustion by Invisible Rays.

power, so that if the alleged performances of Archimedes during the
would have been the philosopher's chief agents of combustion.
small scale we can readily produce, with the purely invisible rays of
the sun's total radiation.
concave mirror, the rays are converged, the cone of reflected rays and
always floating in the air.
the source of rays our solution of iodine, the light of the cone is
is placed, even for a moment, at the dark focus, shows that the

Almost anything that ordinary fire can effect may be accomplished at
same time perfectly cold, on account of its transparency to the
  An air thermometer, with a hollow rack-salt bulb, would be
in the open air there is no convection.
not the air, is the substance in which the heat is embodied.
of wood, placed at the focus, absorbs the heat, and dense volumes of
would rise, if the invisible rays were competent to heat it.
perfectly dark focus dry paper is instantly inflamed: chips of wood
charred paper are raised to vivid incandescence.
that the obscure rays would show no preference for black over white;
body, if not already black, ought to be blackened.
be burned, it is necessary to blacken or otherwise tarnish them, so as
  Blackened zinc foil, when brought
burns with its peculiar purple light.
tarnished magnesium ribbon, also bursts into flame.
charcoal suspended in a receiver full of oxygen are also set on fire
passed through the receiver, still possessing sufficient power to
  If,
vacuo, it immediately glows at the place where the focus falls.


  Transmutation of Rays: Calorescence.

Magazine,' vol.
 P.

substantial identity of light and radiant heat, and we have now the
  A
inverted and magnified image of the object.
our iodine solution, an intensely luminous inverted image of the
mirror employed in the foregoing experiments.
interposed, and the light is cut away, what becomes of this image?  It
only the peculiar constitution of our eyes that disqualifies us from
  Falling on white
are pierced in it, corresponding to the images of the two coke points:
of platinised platinum, either in vacuo or in air, radiant heat is
incandescence upon both the carbon and the metal.
those obtained with the electric light have also been obtained with

Before a Cambridge audience it is hardly necessary to refer to the
spectrum.
discoveries.
discovered and investigated _Fluorescence_; for the new phenomena here
  He, by the
ultraviolet rays of the spectrum as to render them visible.
the interposition of the platinum foil, the refrangibility of the
  Looking
light of the image is decomposed, and a complete spectrum is obtained.
The invisible rays of the electric light, remoulded by the atoms of
into red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet, and ultraviolet
  Could we, moreover, raise the original source of rays to a
rays of such a source a single incandescent image, but from the dark
the second a third, and so on--a series of complete images and spectra
source.
transmitted through glasses of various colours, it was found that in
with a pink or purplish light.
considerations of obvious interest are suggested by it.
kinds of black glass differ notably as to their power of transmitting
  When thin, some descriptions tint the sun with a
green.
  In fact,
glass, is highly transparent to the calorific rays, and by employing
though in a less striking form than with the iodine.
chosen for thermometers, and intended to absorb completely the solar
carbon is incorporated be colourless.
thermometer a perfect absorbent, the glass ought in the first instance
  Soon after the discovery of fluorescence the late Dr.
William Allen Miller pointed to the lime-light as an illustration of
  Direct experiments have since entirely
published in 1855.


  Deadness of the Optic Nerve to the Calorific Rays.

rays of the noonday sun.
visible in the darkest room, even when a white screen was placed at
  It was
focus the sensation of light might be experienced.
experiment was twofold.
degree by the humours of the eye the albumen of the humours might
  If, on the contrary, no such
force sufficient to destroy it.
results, experiments were made on water and on a solution of alum, and
for an experiment any serious damage could be done.
therefore caused to approach the dark focus, no defence, in the first
surrounding the pupil, could not be borne.
pierced in a plate of metal, and the eye, placed behind the aperture,
 The

of platinum foil was placed in the position occupied by the retina a
  The platinum became red-hot.
done to the eye by this experiment; no impression of light was

But the humours of the eye are known to be highly impervious to the
radiation in the foregoing experiment reach the retina at all?'  The
in part absorbed by the humours.
showed that the proportion of obscure rays which reached the retina
  of the total radiation; while the luminous

  Were the purely luminous rays of the electric lamp
fate of a retina placed there.
this would be accomplished by an amount of wave-motion but little more
bears at the focus of invisible rays.

  At a common
employed in these experiments is 800 times the light of a candle.
the same distance, the portion of the radiation of the electric light
times the luminous radiation of the candle.
borne in mind that the heat which any ray, luminous or non-luminous,
ray.
of a mile, its light at this distance being less than 1/20,000,000 of

Hence, to make the candle-light a mile off equal in power to the
distance, its intensity would have to be multiplied by 1,500 x
  Thus the thirty thousand
received by the retina at the distance of a foot, would, if slightly
  Nothing
Melloni and others to subsist between the optic nerve and the
  The optic nerve responds, as
to be excited by others of almost infinitely greater energy, whose

********************
10.

At an early part of this lecture it was affirmed, that when a platinum
were constantly added, while the intensity of the old ones was
  Thus, in Dr.
that generated the orange, yellow, green, and blue augmented the
  What is true of the red is true of every other
  We cannot indeed see the
measure it and express it numerically.
experiment was performed: A spiral of platinum wire was surrounded by
orifice in the globe the rays could pass from the spiral and fall
  Placing in front of the
raised from a low dark heat to the fullest incandescence, with the









                          62
Orange                             89
Bright orange                     144
Yellow                            202
White                             276
Intense white                     440
Thus the augmentation of the electric current, which raises the wire
the same time the energy of the obscure radiation, until at the end it

What has been here proved true of the totality of the ultra-red rays
  Placing our linear thermo-electric
ray once emitted continues to be emitted with increased energy as the
  The platinum spiral, so often referred to,
was formed from its light.
in the region of obscure rays beyond the red, and by diminishing the
  It was then
with the following results:
Appearance of spiral      Energy of obscure rays
Dark                                 1
Dark                                 6
Faint red                           10
Dull red                            13
Red                                 18
Full red.




their maximum together; as the one augmented, the other augmented,
refrangibility here chosen, became 122 times what it was at first.
reach a white heat the wire has to pass through all the stages of
in an intensified form, the rays of all those stages.

hitherto been examined.
electric current, or by the oxyhydrogen jet, pours out invisible rays
  The same is true of
  It is true of all metals which
  It also holds good for
  Every gush of dazzling light has
transcends the light in energy.
all bodies capable of being raised to a white heat, either in the
  It would doubtless also apply to the
  In
is constructed, the obscure radiation towers upwards like a mountain,
  From the
the intensity of that dark radiation, which is the precursor and

We thus find the luminous radiation appearing when the radiant body
vibrating atoms of the body have attained a certain width of swing.
solid and molten bodies a certain amplitude cannot be surpassed
sense of vision.
speculate, we might ask, are not these more rapid vibrations the
atoms, when they swing through very wide spaces, and thus encroach
so, whatever be the agency by which the large swinging space is
 It
a hammer, or by the blows of the molecules of a non-luminous gas, like
particles when transmitting radiant heat.
will be incandescence.
electric beam may be regarded as generating synchronous vibrations
vibrations have attained a certain amplitude, the mutual jostling of
as the necessary product of the heat-giving ones.


 Absorption of Radiant Heat by Vapours and Odours.

experiments on permanent gases, and we have now to turn our attention
  Here, as in the case of the
kinds of molecules, as regards their power of intercepting the
  While some vapours allow the waves a comparatively
deflection of the magnetic needle.
by air, at a pressure of one atmosphere, to be unity, the following
1/60th of an atmosphere:
Name of vapour                        Absorption
Bisulphide of carbon                      47
Iodide of methyl                         115
Benzol                                   136
Amylene                                  321
Sulphuric ether                          440
Formic ether                             548
Acetic ether                             612
Bisulphide of carbon is the most transparent vapour in this list; and
however, produces 47 times the effect of a whole atmosphere of air,
effect of a whole atmosphere of air.
of the acetic ether here employed, and comparing them then together,
thousand times that intercepted by the air.

of a body emitting obscure rays, intercepts more or less of the
  A similar effect is produced by perfumes diffused in the

moistened by patchouli, the scent taken up by the current absorbs 30
and yet patchouli acts more feebly on radiant heat than any other

Here follow the results obtained with various essential oils, the
already employed for gases and vapours:
Name of perfume                       Absorption
Patchouli                                  30
Sandal wood                                32
Geranium                                   33
Oil of cloves                              34
Otto of roses                              37
Bergamot                                   44
Neroli                                     47
Lavender                                   60
Lemon                                      65
Portugal                                   67
Thyme                                      68
Rosemary                                   74
Oil of laurel                              80
Camomile flowers                           87
Cassia                                    109
Spikenard                                 355
Aniseed                                   372
Thus the absorption by a tube full of dry air being 1, that of the
rosemary 74, whilst that of aniseed amounts to 372.
to speculate the quantities of matter concerned in these actions.


  Aqueous Vapour in relation to the Terrestrial Temperatures.

preparation, might appear incredible.
volatile body, and our atmosphere, resting as it does upon the surface

with the vapour of water, which is a perfectly impalpable gas,

contains is of almost infinitesimal amount, 99.
parts of the atmosphere being composed of oxygen and nitrogen.
absence of experiment, we should never think of ascribing to this
radiation; and yet its influence is far more potent than that of the
  To say that on a day of average humidity in
itself, would certainly be an understatement of the fact.
single molecule of aqueous vapour with an atom of either of the main
thousand times the action of the former exceeds that of the latter.

on the extreme feebleness of the air; the power of aqueous vapour
infinitesimal.
notwithstanding its small specific gravity, exercises a very potent
  Probably from 10 to 15 per cent.
the earth is absorbed within 10 or 20 feet of the earth's surface.
This must evidently be of the utmost consequence to the life of the
  Imagine the superficial molecules of the earth agitated with
motion would be carried rapidly away, and lost for ever to our planet,
their outward course.
becomes hereby heated, thus wrapping the earth like a warm garment,
otherwise sustain.
influence of an atmospheric envelope.
M.
 Hopkins have, one and all, enriched scientific
which these eminent men have applied to atmospheric air, have, if my

The observations of meteorologists furnish important, though hitherto
  Wherever the air
  By day, such
maximum high; by night, on the other hand, the earth's heat escapes
  Hence the
is driest.
central Asia, in Australia--wherever drought reigns, we have the heat
  In the Sahara
temperature runs rapidly down to freezing, because there is no vapour
  And here another instance
it were to check her own excess.
aqueous vapour of the air is condensed to water on the surface of the
condensation makes water the radiating body.
that to the rays emitted by water, aqueous vapour is especially
  Hence the very act of condensation, consequent on terrestrial
that particular character which renders it most liable to be prevented

It might however be urged that, inasmuch as we derive all our heat
chill must also shut out the solar radiation.
but only partially; the sun's rays are different in quality from the
absorbs the one must necessarily absorb the other.
water, for example, one tenth of an inch in thickness, the sun's rays
this thickness, as Melloni has proved, no single ray from the warmed
  In like manner, the sun's rays pass with
absorbing power of this substance being mainly exerted upon the
  In
heat, the mean temperature of our planet is higher than is due to its

********************
13.

The deportment here assigned to atmospheric vapour has been
parks of London, from the downs of Epsom, from the hills and sea-beach
instance dried, and afterwards rendered artificially humid by pure
  It has also been established in the following way: Ten
common thickness, to intercept the waves of heat, was carefully
  The vapours of the liquids were next taken, in quantities
intercept the waves of heat was also determined.

power, and proceeding onwards to the most energetic, the following


               Bisulphide of carbon.

                         Chloroform.

                   Iodide of methyl.

                    Iodide of ethyl.

                             Benzol.

                            Amylene.

                   Sulphuric aether.

                      Acetic aether.

                      Formic aether.

                            Alcohol.


We here find the order of absorption in both cases be the same.
have liberated the molecules from the bonds which trammel them more or
aggregation does not change their relative powers of absorption.
Nothing could more clearly prove that the act of absorption depends
liquid and the gaseous state.
table that the position of a vapour is determined by that of its
  Now at the very foot of the list of liquids stands _water_,
absorption.
vapour of water had ever been made, we should be entitled to rank that
  Its
  I have proved that a
saturated with the vapour of sulphuric aether, would intercept 35 per
  of the earth's radiation.
vapour necessary to saturate air is much less than the amount of
probable that the estimate already made of the action of atmospheric
that we are indebted to this wonderful substance, to an extent not
imagined, for the temperature now existing at the surface of the

********************
14.

Throughout the reflections which have hitherto occupied us, the image
calorific waves, which on passing among the molecules of a gas or
  In all
comparatively quiescent molecules of the gas or vapour that occupied
  We have now to change the form of our conception, and
the recipients but as the originators of wave-motion.
we must figure them vibrating, and generating in the surrounding

which proves so potent as regards the phenomena of absorption, does
  For the
heat our gases and vapours to the same temperature, and then examine
aether in which they swing.

great number of small apertures, the burner being connected by a tube
  By gentle
against the copper ball, where each of them, being heated, rose in an
  A thermoelectric pile, entirely screened from the
deflection of a magnetic needle connected with the pile declared the

By this mode of experiment it was proved that the selfsame molecular
powerful radiator--that the atom or molecule which is competent to
send them forth.
themselves unable to emit any sensible amount of radiant heat, the
disturbing the surrounding aether.
same was proved to hold good for the vapours of volatile liquids, the
absorptive power.

character, is still easy to grasp.
an exhausted tube, the temperature of the air is raised to a degree
 [Footnote: See above for a
] Such air is said to be dynamically heated,
rock-salt window is provided for the passage of its rays.
instead of being empty the tube contain a small quantity of vapour,
molecules of which convert into the radiant form the heat imparted to
  By this process also, which I have
has been conclusively proved.
motion to another gas or vapour, the transference of heat is
  The Dynamic Radiation of
]
In the excellent researches of Leslie, De la Provostaye and Detains,
has been variously illustrated; while the labours, theoretical and
expansion, and enriched it by applications of the highest kind.
their results are now to be added the foregoing, whereby gases and
with the thermo-electric pile, are proved by it to exhibit the
chemical combination on both being exhibited in the most decisive and

********************
15.
  Physical

In the foregoing experiments with gases and vapours have employed
to radiant heat, that lengths of a few feet they intercept every ray
  The substances, however, which show

point of period, the former failing to affect the retina because their
  Hence, in one way or other, the
waves which impinge upon them.
The admirable researches of Kirchhoff help us an answer.
and molecules of every gas have certain definite rates of oscillation,
recurrence synchronise with those of the atomic groups amongst which they
  Thus, when we find invisible rays absorbed and the visible ones
periods of the atoms constituting the gaseous molecules coincide with

It requires some discipline of the imagination to form a clear picture
  Such a picture is, however, possible, and ought to
  When the waves of aether impinge upon molecules whose
the timed strokes of the waves augment the vibration of the molecules,

calorific waves; and it is not difficult to see that as every wave
molecules must finally be caused to swing through wider spaces than if
  In fact, it is not difficult to see
might remain practically quiescent.
the waves of the visible spectrum pass through a transparent gas or
  There is here no sensible transference of motion from the
absorption of heat.


emitted by solid bodies.
transparent to the rays emitted by the heated copper plate already
  There are, however, certain rays, comparatively few in
impervious; and could we obtain a source of heat emitting such rays
that source, than any other gas.
the flame of carbonic oxide, where hot carbonic acid constitutes the
  Of the rays emitted by our heated plate of
carbonic acid.
carbonic acid absorbs twice as much as olefiant gas.
change in the power of the former, as an absorber, is simply due to
identical, and that the waves from the flame freely transfer their
  Thus it is that
long, absorbs 60 per cent.
flame, while one-thirtieth of an atmosphere absorbs 48 per cent.
the heat from the same source.

detected by its action on the rays from the carbonic oxide flame.
Carrying, for example, the dried human breath into a tube four feet
amounts to 50 per cent.
  Radiant heat may
carbonic acid expired from the lungs.
 Barrett,
  The absorption
carbonic acid, was first determined.
prepared, was then mixed with dry air in such proportions that the
the dried breath.
immediately gave that of the latter.
chemically by Dr.
 Barrett, gave the


Chemical analysis              Physical analysis
4.
56
5.
22
It is thus proved that in the quantity of aethereal motion which it is
of the breath, and hence of the combustion going on in the human

Still this question of period, though of the utmost importance, is not
  The aether,
readiness.
as acceptable as those of the atoms in a molecule of olefiant gas;
radiant power must be referred not to period, but to some other
  The atomic group which constitutes the molecule of
the oxygen, it may be because the group is able to lay a vastly more
  Another, and
vibrations, being those of the constituent atoms of the molecule,
 iv.
in highly condensed aether, which acts like condensed air upon sound.
But whatever may be the fate of these attempts to visualise the physics
phenomena of radiation and absorption we must take into consideration
which the external aether is disturbed.


  Summary and Conclusion.

behind.
described: the compounding of matter from elementary atoms, and the
considered and experimentally illustrated.
elementary gases radiant heat was found to pass as through a vacuum,
to the calorific-waves.
our attention to other elementary bodies, the examination of which led
carbon, possesses the power of detaching, with extraordinary sharpness,
rays up to the extreme red, and permitting the calorific rays beyond
  This substance was then employed
invisible rays so intense as to produce almost all the effects
  Combustible bodies were burnt, and
invisible rays.
rays of the electric light were rendered visible, and all the colours
  The extreme
was demonstrated, one-eighth only of its radiation consisting of
  The deadness of the optic nerve to those invisible
bright and the dark rays of a solid body, raised gradually to
invariable accompaniment of intense white heat.
formed, or a meteorite rendered luminous, on any other condition.
light-giving rays constituting only a small fraction of the total
their periods are attuned to the special requirements of the eye.

to exist, as regards their powers of absorption.
molecules from a state of liquid to a state of gas, and found, in both
asserted.
shown to be determined by that of the liquid from which it is derived.
Reversing our conceptions, and regarding the molecules of gases and
not as absorbers but as radiators; it was proved that the powers of
which rendered a body competent to intercept the waves of aether,
 Perfumes
extraordinary tenuity, they were found vastly superior, in point of

diffused and most important of all vapours--the aqueous vapour of our
calorific rays.
its general influence on the temperature of the earth, were then
  A cobweb spread above a blossom is sufficient to
air, attenuated as it is, checks the drain of terrestrial heat, and
assuredly accrue, were no such substance interposed between it and the
  We considered the influence of vibrating period, and
its action upon radiant heat, the exact amount of carbonic acid

Thus, in brief outline, were placed before you some of the results of
been to raise in your minds distinct physical images of the various
  It is thought by some that
doubt might fairly be raised as to the value of any study which would
  But the experience of the last hour
goes hand in hand with the culture of the imagination.
greater part of this discourse we have been sustained by this faculty.
We have been picturing atoms, and molecules, and vibrations, and
discerned by the exercise of imagination.
faculty which enables us transcend the boundaries of sense, and
one.
which have occupied us here today; and in proportion to your power of
images with the terms employed, will be the pleasure and the profit

The outward facts of nature are insufficient to satisfy the mind.
cannot be content with knowing that the light and heat of the sun
  We are led irresistibly to enquire,
out of the region of sense into that of imagination.
line of thought was pursued further five years subsequently.
'Scientific Use of the Imagination' in Vol.
]
Thus pondering, and questioning, and striving to supplement that which
unseen which is necessary to its completeness, men of genius have in
through them, the general relationship of natural phenomena.
working power of Nature consists of actual or potential motion, of
  This motion manifests
transferred from the one to the other, and incessantly transformed by
  It is as real in the waves of the aether as in the waves
turn are derived from the sun--are, indeed, nothing more than the
  It is the calorific waves
agitate our ocean.
rub silently against the ocean's bed, or subside by the mutual
without producing heat, finally resolve themselves into waves of
existence was derived.
  Nature is not an
  If you open a
  Change the
replies.
while another resounds.
optic, the auditory, and other nerves of the human body being so many
universal power.


CONSTITUTION OF BODIES.

Britain, Jan.
]
ONE of the most important functions of physical science, considered as
processes of Nature to apprehend the insensible.
processes give direction to the line of thought; but this once given,

small in comparison with the vast region accessible to thought which
  From a few observations of a comet, when it comes
path in regions which no telescope can reach: and in like manner, by
ourselves at home in other and wider worlds, which are traversed by

From the earliest ages the questions, 'What is light?' and 'What is
would have been answered had they not been preceded by the question,
first disciplined, conceptions being thus obtained from direct
far too subtle to be observed directly.
vibratory motion.
air around it into undulations or waves, which speed away on all sides
shake the auditory nerve, and awake in the brain the sensation of
  When sufficiently near a sounding body we can feel the
  A deaf man, for example, plunging his hand
body those tremors which, when imparted to the nerves of healthy ears,
  There are various ways of rendering those
until numberless experiments of this kind had been executed, that the
of misgiving, to the conviction that what is sound within us is,

But once having established this fact--once having proved beyond all
auditory nerve--the thought soon suggested itself that light might be
  This was a great step in
emitted by the eye, and not as anything imparted to it.
be produced by an agitation of the retina, what is it that produces
through the humours of the eye against the retina, which he supposed
  The impact of these
light.
driven from the field by the more wonderful and far more philosophical

The domain in which this motion of light is carried on lies entirely
  The waves of light require a medium
taste, or smell this medium.
established?  By showing, that by the assumption of this wonderful
a fulness, and clearness, and conclusiveness, which leave no desire of
  When the law of gravitation first
himself to examine whether it accounted for all the facts.
determined the courses of the planets; he calculated the rapidity of
equinoxes, the ebb and flow of the tides, and found all explained by
  He therefore regarded this law as
conclusion.
found our belief in the existence of the universal aether.
explains facts far more various and complicated than those on which
  If a single phenomenon could be pointed out
give it up; but no such phenomenon has ever been pointed out.
therefore, at least as certain that space is filled with a medium, by
is traversed by that force which holds in its grasp, not only our

There is no more wonderful instance than this of the production of a
imagination.
can give to airy nothings a local habitation and a name, but that
the range of the senses--to present to itself distinct images of
are so minute individually as to elude all observation.
waves of air excited by a tuning-fork which render its vibrations
  It is the waves of aether sent forth from those lamps
waves, that it would take from 30,000 to 60,000 of them placed end to
  Their number, however, compensates for
  Trillions of them have entered your eyes, and hit
utterance of the shortest sentence of this discourse.
steadfast result of modern research; but we never could have reached
  We never could have measured the
exercised ourselves among the waves of sound.
mutually helpful, the conceptions of each being expanded,

The aether which conveys the pulses of light and heat not only fills
encircles the atoms of which these bodies are composed.
motion of these atoms, and not that of any sensible parts of bodies,
  This motion is the objective cause of what,
  An atom, then, sending its
through the air.
and briefly consider its relation to the bodies whose vibrations it
  Different bodies, when heated to the same temperature,
radiators, others are bad radiators; which means that some are so
aether, producing therein powerful undulations; while the atoms of
the medium without materially disturbing its repose.
experiments have proved that elementary bodies, except under certain
  An atom,
the air.
prongs is too small to evoke at any distance the sensation of sound.
But if we permit the atoms to combine chemically and form molecules,
radiation.
combined atoms of a body, may be many thousand times that produced by

The pitch of a musical note depends upon the rapidity of its
  Now, the
  Taking a slice of
light to pass through an arrangement of prisms, it is decomposed.
have the effect obtained by Newton, who first unrolled the solar beam
  At one end of this
extremes lie the other prismatic colours.
spectrum from the red to the violet, the pitch of the light--if I may
by a more rapid succession of impulses than that which produces the
  The vibrations of the violet are about twice as
spectrum is about an octave.

into another by insensible gradations.
of tuning-forks, of gradually augmenting pitch, were vibrating at the
  But turning to another spectrum--that, namely, obtained
of two narrow and intensely luminous green bands.
two forks only, of slightly different pitch, were vibrating.
length of the waves which produce this first band is such that 47,460
  The waves which
47,920 to fill an inch.
impulses imparted, in one second, to every eye which sees it, is 677
same time, by the second band is 600 millions of millions.
project upon a white screen the beautiful stream of green light from
  This luminous stream is the
  The rates of vibration of the atoms of
whatever height the temperature of the vapour may be raised, the
depends upon that rapidity, remain unchanged.

periods of vibration, and these are such as to disqualify the vapour,
  The
  It is
visible if we could burn the gas in a clean atmosphere.
atmosphere, even at the summit of Mont Blanc, is dirty; in London it
greater portion of its present light.
enormous.
temperature of the oxyhydrogen flame is 6,000° Fahr.
platinum is heated to vivid redness, at a distance of two inches
  The vapour which
  In the flame itself
the flame.
dazzling Drummond light.
when it impinges upon the solid body, the vibrations excited in that

Thus far we have fixed our attention on atoms and molecules in a state
vibrations, and transmits them through space.
generated by one system of molecules to impinge upon another system,
permitted to pass?  Will they transfer their motion to the molecules
the intermolecular spaces, and thus escape?
The answer to this question depends upon a condition which may be
  These two
  They vibrate with the same
loudly sounding the same musical note.
throw the other into strong vibration, and bring that other near the
  Allowing them to continue
vibrating fork, the sound does not cease.
up the vibrations of its neighbour, and is now sounding in its turn.
Dismounting one of the forks, and permitting the other to remain upon
  You
  Detached from its case, the amount of motion
distance.
one, but not into actual contact with it, out of the silence rises a
  Whence comes it?  From the vibrations which have been

That the motion should thus transfer itself through the air it is
  If a morsel
rendered thereby powerless to affect, or to be affected by, the other.
It is easy to understand this experiment.
can affect the other, because they are _perfectly timed_.
pulse causes the prong of the silent fork to vibrate through an
  But just as it has completed this small
  Thus, the impulses add
  In the five seconds during which the forks were
neighbour and those 1,280 shocks, all delivered at the proper moment,
vibrations of the mounted fork as to render them audible to all.

musical vibrations, is this: Three small gas-flames are inserted into
  Each of these flames can be
length of the tube surrounding the flame.
higher is the pitch.
respective tubes, but each of them can be caused to respond to a
  With an instrument called
be produced.
higher one, we finally attain the pitch of the flame in the longest
  The moment it is reached, the flame bursts into song.
other flames are still silent within their tubes.
instrument on to higher notes, the second flame is started, and the
  A still higher note starts it also.
the sound of the syren rises gradually in pitch, it awakens every
of recurrence are similar to its own.

which synchronises with the waves; and were these waves to impinge
transference might be so great as to absorb the whole of the original
  Let us apply these facts to radiant heat.
flame is the flame of carbonic oxide; this transparent gas is carbonic
  In the blue flame we have carbonic acid intensely heated,
  It thus
the silent one.
the hot and cold gas, the waves emitted by the former are intercepted
prevented.
this particular flame, though highly transparent to heat of every
  We are here manifestly dealing with that great principle
scientific men to determine the substances of which the sun, the
a body which is competent to emit any ray, whether of heat or light,
  The absorption
from which the rays, or more correctly the waves, issue, and those of

To its almost total incompetence to emit white light, aqueous vapour
  It cannot, for
non-luminous rays of the earth.
absorb luminous rays is shared by water and ice--in fact, by all
  Their transparency is due to their
  The molecules of such substances
through transparent bodies without disturbing the molecular rest.
purely luminous beam, however intense may be its heat, is sensibly
  We can, for example, converge a powerful
a single spicula of the crystals.
snows of the Alps swept away by the sunshine of summer?  I answer,
sunshine whatever in them.
snow-fields and are flashed in echoes from crystal to crystal, but
  They are hardly at
  But a body of
the glaciers to shrink and the snows to disappear; it is they that
frozen captivity the Rhone and the Rhine.

are converged to a focus of dazzling brilliancy.
of the rays, between the light and the focus, a vessel of water, and
concentrated beam.
is set on fire.
incompetent to melt the ice.
ice immediately liquefies, and the water trickles from it in drops.
Reintroducing the cell of water, the fusion is arrested, and the drops
  The transparent water of the cell exerts no sensible
beam, which, when permitted to act, is competent to melt the ice.
something is the dark radiation of the electric light.
a slab of pure ice in front of the electric lamp; send a luminous beam
  By means of
  The beam,
 But observe what
star, each star resembling a flower of six petals, and growing visibly
  As the leaves enlarge, their edges become
  We have
invisible rays of the electric beam.
this wonderful way, and reveal to us the exquisite atomic structure of
lakes.

illustration of the action of these lightless rays.
powders, for example, are both white, and undistinguishable from each
  The luminous rays of the sun are unabsorbed by
sugar, is heated so highly by the concentrated beam of the electric
other substance, salt, is barely warmed at the focus.
perfectly transparent liquids in test-tubes at the focus, one of them
is hardly warmed.
which is speedily reached; that of the second liquid is only 48°C,
  These anomalies are entirely due to
electric beam, and indeed constitutes 90 per cent.
power.

dark rays may be detached from the total emission of the electric
  This ray-filter is a liquid, black as pitch to the luminous,
  It
transmission.
distance of several feet from the electric lamp, the dark rays form an
  By proper means, this image may be
  It might,
dark rays, could be extracted, by a process of transmutation, all the
  It might also be proved that those
permitted to enter the eye, and to break upon the retina, without

The dark rays being thus collected, you see nothing at their place of
  With a proper thermometer it could be proved that even
  And mark
  It proves the aether at the focus
aethereal motion may there exist, without the least aerial motion.
But, though you see it not, there is sufficient heat at that focus to
  The heat there is competent to raise iron to a
  It can
  It
  The moment,

It has been already affirmed that, whether as regards radiation or
  This might
of these is furnished by the deportment of that extremely combustible
  It is
  But
towards radiant heat is still more impressive.
the intense radiation of an ordinary fire without bursting into flame.
It may also be exposed for twenty or thirty seconds at an obscure
ignition.
concentrated, notwithstanding the extremely inflammable character of
refuse to partake of the motion of the powerful waves of low

The knowledge we now possess will enable us to analyse with profit a
  White dresses are worn in summer, because they
  The celebrated Benjamin
them to direct sunshine, and found that they sank to different depths
  The black cloth sank deepest, the white did not sink at
  Franklin inferred from this experiment that black-bodies are the

  One of these two cards
white one.
them there until they have acquired as high a temperature as they can
  Which of the cards is then most highly
 Simply
against the cheek or forehead, it is found intolerably hot.
the dark card in the same position, it is found cool.
powder has absorbed far more heat than the dark one.
result abolishes a hundred conclusions which have been hastily drawn
  Again, here are suspended two

the other by a white one.
the flame, but the white bulb has absorbed most, and its mercury
  This
darkness of a body you can draw no certain conclusion regarding its

The reason of this simply is, that colour gives us intelligence of
the coloured body.
certainty infer from the colour of a body its power of absorption; but
from the sun itself, consists of invisible calorific rays, regarding
  A body may be highly transparent to
  Thus the white
specially selected on account of its extreme perviousness to the
while the dark powder was chosen on account of its extreme
rays.
of the whole emission consists of invisible rays; the body, therefore,
body was a white one.

from natural facts what may be called their intellectual value.
Throughout the processes of Nature we have interdependence and
discipline, consists in the tracing out of this interdependence, and
  The outward and visible phenomena
of its name and fame if it halted at facts, however practically

that it can yield, calling to our aid the knowledge which our
  Let us imagine two pieces of cloth
sunned snow.
whether there is any reason to expect that it will sink in the snow at
  There is knowledge at hand which enables us to reply at once in
  There is, on the contrary, reason to expect that, after
instead of in a hollow; that instead of a depression, we shall have a
  For, as regards the luminous
cannot be warmed, nor the other melted, by such rays.
white and the snow is white, because their confusedly mingled fibres
  Whether,
of the sun.
greatest avidity is ice,--or snow, which is merely ice in powder.
Hence, a less amounts of heat will be lodged in the cloth than in the
  The cloth must therefore act as a shield to the
of the exposed snow, its shield must, in due time, be left behind,

But though the snow transcends the cloth, both as a radiator and
  Cloth is very powerful in
  Let us now turn our attention to the piece of
as that of the white.
colour, we must, in order to study this effect in its purity, preserve
  Let us then suppose the black
  The cloth itself,
the snow around it.
the undyed cloth, is now added the absorption of the whole of the
than sufficient to turn the balance in favour of the black cloth.
sum of its actions on the dark and luminous rays, exceeds the action
  Hence the cloth will sink in the

Throughout this discourse the main stress has been laid on chemical
radiation and absorption.

vapours are derived, it has been proved by the most varied and
molecular--that they depend upon chemical, and not upon mechanical,
  In attempting to extend this principle to solids I was met
seemed flatly to forbid such an extension.
found the same radiant and absorbent power for chalk and lamp-black.
MM.
experiments on chemical precipitates of various kinds, and found that
  They
extremely fine state of division, the influence of this state is so
due to chemical constitution.

oversight has run, the mere mention of which will show what caution is
experiments or two will make clear wherein the oversight consists.
Filling a brightly polished metal cube with boiling water, I determine
  As a
  Both surfaces
difference in their radiative power?  Simply this: one of the surfaces
metallic lustre behind; and this varnish, though so perfectly
non-luminous ones.
a powerful absorber.
copiously pouring forth radiant heat itself, it does not allow a
  The varnish

Now Melloni, and Masson, and Courtépée experimented thus: they mixed
of a brush, upon the surfaces of a cube like this.
their red powders red, their white ones white, and their black ones
surrounded every particle_.
colour had no influence on radiation, no chance had been given to it
precipitates radiated alike, it was the radiation from a varnish,
  Hundreds,
in this way, by various enquirers, but the work will, I fear, have to
  I am not, indeed, acquainted with an instance in
many able men in succession, vitiating so large an amounts of
  Basing our reasonings thus on demonstrated
envelope of the particles, and not the particles themselves, was the
  To reason thus,
facts, is an incessant exercise of the student of physical science.
But having thus followed, for a time, the light of reason alone
intellectual conclusion, our duty is to bring that conclusion to an
 In this way we fortify our science.

the gum, I take two powders presenting the same physical appearance;
lead.
without varnish of any kind.
determining the radiation from the two surfaces, one of them is found

  Here, however, is a second cube,
difference being that the powders are laid on by means of a
  Both surfaces are now absolutely alike in radiative
  Both of them emit somewhat more than was emitted by either of
radiator than either of them.
white with white, vast differences are found; comparing black with
in some cases the black radiates far more than the white, while in
  Determining,
hand-in-hand with their radiative power.
absorber, and the bad radiator is a bad absorber.
evident that as regards the radiation and absorption of non-luminous
radiation of the sun, consisting as it does mainly of non-luminous
delusive.
 But
for reasons which I have given in analysing the experiments of
of solar heat.

results of recent enquiry.
can hardly answer you, unless you define the term use.
to ask whether those dark rays which clear away the Alpine snows, will
steam-engines--while affirming their power to do both, I would frankly
with coal in these particulars.
unknown to me; and when our coal-fields are exhausted, it is possible
perform their work, in this transcendental way.
that the student of science should have his labours tested by their
Homer's Iliad?  You smile, and possibly think that Homer's Iliad is
  There's the rub.
of science practical uses, forget, or do not know, that it also is
universe is a thing profitable in itself, and requiring no practical

But while the student of Nature distinctly refuses to have his labours
include mental as well as material good, he knows full well that the
pure natural truth.
this age, and the men whose scientific knowledge, and mechanical
honour.
in those more substantial benefits which the direct service of the
  But who, I would ask, put the
that flashes along the line?  This, I am bound to say, was done by two
dweller in England, [Footnote: Faraday] who never in their enquiries
was the fascination which draws the climber to a never-trodden peak,
Nile.
and kings of science is what the world calls 'useful knowledge,' the
  But science has
human mind; and I would base my appeal to you on the specimen which
education at the present day can be deemed even approximately

********************
IV.

1868-69.


MEASURED by their power, not to excite vision, but to produce heat--in
the sun and of the electric light, as shown in the preceding articles,
  In the domain of chemistry, however, there
while the more minute waves, through what may be called their
  A
1868, and further illustrated in subsequent years, may be exhibited by
concentrated sunlight, or to the concentrated beam of the electric
  Their investigation led up to the discourse on 'Dust and
account of them is introduced here.


employed in my researches on radiant heat, was supported horizontally
  At one end of the tube was placed an electric lamp,
the tube, and that of the beam issuing from the lamp, were coincident.
In the first experiments the two ends of the tube were closed by
  For the
  It was
tubes used for the purification of the air.

 2 (I have used at least fifty of
  Each of them was stopped
(a) ended immediately below the cork, while the other (b) descended to
orifice about 0.
  It was found necessary to
  In the later experiments corks

The little flask, thus formed, being partially filled with the liquid
purified current of air.
the cock which cut off the supply of purified air being cautiously
by the small orifice at the lower end of b into the liquid.
this it bubbled, loading itself with vapour, after which the mixed air
experimental tube, where they were subjected to the action of light.

 3, where L represents the
air-pump, and F the test-tube containing the volatile liquid.
tube tt' is plugged with cotton-wool intended to intercept the
the tube T sulphuric acid, the one intended to remove the carbonic

The power of the electric beam to reveal the existence of anything
extraordinary.
tube which in ordinary daylight appears absolutely clean, is often

The following are some of the results obtained with this arrangement:
Nitrite of amyl.
permitted to enter the experimental tube, while the beam from the
  Curious clouds, the cause of
being afterwards whirled through the tube.

to enter it in the dark.
light was then sent through the mixture.
_optically empty_, nothing whatever being seen within it; but before a

slowing at some places vivid iridescence.

tube a strongly convergent cone of rays.
again filled in darkness.
precipitation upon the beam was so rapid and intense that the cone,
solid luminous spear.
were allowed to enter the tube in diffuse daylight.
however, which shone with such extraordinary radiance under the

The quantity of mixed air and vapour within the experimental tube
  The rapidity of the action
  When, for example, the
only five inches, the action was not nearly so rapid as when the tube
  In such cases, however, it was exceedingly interesting to
bluish-white cloud slowly forming along the axis of the tube, and

Fig.

Fig.

When dry oxygen was employed to carry in the vapour the effect was the

When dry hydrogen was used as a vehicle, the effect was also the same.

vapour of the nitrite and its vehicle.


or any other gas, the effect was substantially the same.
seat of the observed action is the vapour.

  As regards the glass of
in these experiments was perfectly cold.
passing it through a solution of alum, and through the thick
  When the unsifted beam of the lamp
rays did not appear to interfere with the result.

experiments which reveals a new and beautiful series of reactions, I
  The
shaken asunder by certain specific waves of the electric beam, nitric
one, being the result of the decomposition.
nitrous acid were seen mingling with the cloud within the experimental
  The nitrate of amyl, being less volatile than the nitrite, and
precipitated as a visible cloud along the track of the beam.

the vapour occurs, which diminishes the chemical action in the
  In some experiments the precipitated cloud only
  When, under these circumstances, the
tube, copious precipitation occurred there also.

vapour.
Royal Institution, into which the sun shone, permitting the light to
  In the track of
convergent cone in the dust of the room behind it.
tube was filled in the laboratory, covered with a black cloth, and
  On thrusting one end of the
cone was copious and immediate.
tube was in part shielded by that in front, and was also more feebly
  On reversing the tube, a

Physical Considerations.

produced the foregoing effects.
experimental tube, the beam was caused to pass through a red glass,
  This was also
  A blue glass being
latter away prompt precipitation occurred along the track of the blue
  Hence, in this case, the more refrangible rays are the most
  The colour of the liquid nitrite of amyl indicates
other words, the yellow portion of the beam is most freely
  It is not, however, the transmitted portion of any beam
  Blue, as
more energetic action of the blue rays.

the liquid and its vapour.
  A
made almost, if not altogether, identical with that of the liquid
rays than either the red or the yellow glass.
the liquid nitrite itself is most potent in arresting the rays which
  A layer one-eighth of an inch in thickness,
the entire chemical energy of the concentrated beam of the electric

The close relation subsisting between a liquid and its vapour, as
demonstrated.
 Trans.
Motion,' chap, xii; and P.
]  As regards the nitrite
adduced; for here the special constituent of the beam, which provokes
liquid.

What is the real mechanism of this absorption, and where is its seat?
some years ago by a conversation with my excellent friend Professor
]
I figure, as others do, a molecule as a group of atoms, held together

of such molecules.
absorption, is it the molecules that are effective, or is it their
transferred to the molecule as a whole, or to its constituent parts?
The molecule, as a whole, can only vibrate in virtue of the forces
  The intensity of
case, be a function of the distance between the molecules.
identical absorption of the liquid and of the vaporous nitrite of amyl
vapour, and this, to my mind, amounts to an experimental proof that
  For it can
a whole, that it could continue to affect waves of the same period

In point of fact, the decomposition of the nitrite of amyl is itself
for were the absorption the act of the molecule as a whole, the
there would be no mechanical cause for their separation.
probably the synchronism of the vibrations of one portion of the
vibrations to augment, until the chain which binds the parts of the

I anticipate wide, if not entire, generality for the fact that a
  A cell of liquid chlorine
causing chlorine and hydrogen to combine than any other filter of the
  The rays which give chlorine its colour have nothing
being really effective rays.
chlorine and hydrogen, in the exact proportions necessary for the
experimental tube, the beam of the electric lamp being sent through it
  The bulb did not explode when the tube was filled
tube was filled with air.
action similar to, but still more energetic than, that exhibited by
  If this should prove to be the case, it will favour the view

Production of Sky-blue by the Decomposition of Nitrite of Amyl.

intense, the chemical action is exceedingly rapid, the particles
  Not so,
experimental tube.
when the vapour of the nitrite was derived from a portion of its
which the dry air flowed into the experimental tube.

before any action was visible.
and advanced slowly.
appeared of a milky blue.
moderate, the blue was pure and deep.
experiments on the blue of the sky and the morning and evening red,
stirred.
resin is precipitated so finely as to elude the highest microscopic
  By reflected light, such a medium appears bluish, by
quantity of the precipitate, can be caused to pass into orange or red.

is doubtless more similar to what takes place in our atmosphere.
blue, moreover, is far purer and more sky-like than that obtained from
  Never, even in the skies of the Alps, have I
disposition of the light falling upon the precipitated vapour.

--Among the liquids hitherto subjected to the
intensity of action, comes next to the nitrite of amyl.
iodide I have employed both oxygen and hydrogen, as well as air, as a
 The
  It revolved round the
hour-glass, and round the two bells of the glass delicate
  It also folded itself
  In certain conditions
special pearly lustre; when hydrogen was made the vehicle of the

iodine-vapour came out very strongly in the tube.

nitrite of amyl by light on the question of molecular absorption,
a whole, the iodine would not be dislodged from the allyl with which
  The non-synchronism of iodine with the waves of
heat.
instance be the cause of its divorce from the allyl?
Iodide of Isopropyl.
liquid is, at first, more languid than upon iodide of allyl; indeed
languor at the commencement.
clouds begin to form, which grow in density and in beauty as the light
  In every experiment hitherto made with this
divided into two distinct parts near the middle of the tube.
experiments a globe of cloud formed at the centre, from which, right
cylinders.
of rotation.
manifested; the various parts of the cloud would rush through each
  During these motions beautiful and
  At some places the nebulous
longitudinal motion would at times generate in it a series of curved,
causing an appearance resembling, on a small scale, the dirt-bands of
  In the anterior portion of the tube those sudden
and grow in a few seconds into perfect flower-like forms.
of iodide of isopropyl had a character Of its own, and differed
  A gorgeous mauve colour
iodine was present, and it may have been the sky-blue scattered by the
produced the mauve.
were proved to be due to the light; they never occurred in darkness.

call them, in consequence of rotations and other motions, due to
  I content

The tube being filled with the sensitive mixture, the beam was sent
cone of very intense light.
visible; but at the end of this time a faint bluish cloud appeared to

Soon afterwards a second cloud was formed five inches farther down the
  Both clouds were united by a slender cord of the

As the action of the light continued, the first cloud gradually
which rotated round an axis perpendicular to their surfaces, and
  This
the 'cord' extended to the cloud in advance.

  It first
electric discharge.
was difficult to follow, both clouds presented the appearance of a
ones being seen through the outer ones.
resembled claret-glasses in shape.
concentrically set together, the two series being united by the
  Other cords and Blender
spirals around the funnels.

diminished in thickness and became whiter; this was a consequence of
  The cord finally disappeared, while


  To compare them with cobweb or with
themselves.

was sensibly undimmed.

  ON THE BLUE COLOUR OF THE SKY, AND THE POLARISATION OF SKYLIGHT.

light will be found briefly, but, I trust, clearly explained.


After the communication to the Royal Society of the foregoing brief
experiments upon this subject were continued, the number of substances

I now, however, beg to direct attention to two questions glanced at
the polarisation of skylight.
subject for a more fitting occasion, I would merely mention now that
authorities, the two great standing enigmas of meteorology.
was the interest manifested in them by Sir John Herschel, in a letter
enter upon the consideration of these questions so soon.

glass tube about a yard in length, and from 2.
diameter.
the manner already described, and upon it the condensed beam of the
activity of the substance has been declared.

upon vapours visible.
one at least of whose products of decomposition under light shall have
shall be precipitated.
precipitation may be rendered of any degree of fineness, forming
our highest microscopic powers.
particles may be thus obtained, whose diameters constitute but a small

In all cases when the vapours of the liquids employed are sufficiently
commences with the formation of a _blue cloud_.
myself against all misconception as to the use of this term.
'cloud' here referred to is totally invisible in ordinary daylight.
be seen, it requires to be surrounded by darkness, _it only_ being
  This blue cloud differs in
justly have assigned to it an intermediate position between such
  With this explanation, the term 'cloud,' or
cannot, I think, be misunderstood.

  A
some vapour previously employed, was formed in the experimental tube.
On looking across this cloud through a Nicol's prism, the line of
the prism was vertical, the quantity of light reaching the eye was
  When a plate of
of light reaching the eye when the axis of the prism was perpendicular
of the crystal and of the beam were parallel to each other.

  Causing the
perpendicular to the illuminating beam, the quantity of light that
  When the
quantity of light transmitted by the crystal was a minimum.

discharged, the direction of maximum polarisation being at right
polarised light was perpendicular to the beam.
still an undecided point; but the probabilities are so much in its
image on which the mind can rest, that I do not hesitate to employ the
]
Thin plates of selenite or of quartz, placed between the Nicol and the
being most vivid when the line of vision was at right angles to the
  The plate of selenite usually employed was a
from the centre outwards.
the Nicol and the cloud, it exhibited a system of splendidly-coloured

The cloud here referred to was the first operated upon in the manner
  It may, however, be greatly improved upon by the choice of
the substances chosen.
nitrite of butyl, iodide of allyl, iodide of isopropyl, and many other
  I will take the nitrite of butyl as
reference to the present question.

with air in the experimental tube, resists the action of light, or
proximity with another gas or vapour, exhibit vigorous, if not violent
  The case is similar to that of carbonic acid gas, which,
light, but when placed in contiguity with chlorophyl in the leaves of

Dry air was permitted to bubble through the liquid nitrite of butyl,
filled with the mixed air and vapour.
upon the mixture after fifteen minutes' exposure was slight.
was afterwards filled with half an atmosphere of the mixed air and
to bubble through fresh commercial hydrochloric acid.
beam through this mixture, the tube, for a moment, was optically
  But the pause amounted only to a small fraction of a second, a

This cloud began blue, but the advance to whiteness was so rapid as
  The
any signs of polarisation.
strong.

air and nitrite-of-butyl vapour was permitted to enter it until the
  In other
1/300th of an atmosphere.
hydrochloric acid, was then added, till the mercury column was
  The condensed beam of the electric light was
within the tube competent to scatter the light.
superbly blue cloud was formed along, the track of the beam, and it
examination.
its own length, was at first perfectly polarised.
quenched by the Nicol.
and for a time the selenite colours, obtained by looking at it
  The direction of maximum

decided blue colour, and even for some time after the blue had changed
  But, as the light continued to act, the cloud became
ceased to discharge polarised light in the direction of the

But the cloud which had thus ceased to polarise the light emitted
proving that the direction of maximum polarisation changed with the
  This point shall receive further illustration

A blue, equally rich and more durable, was obtained by employing the
  The
  In all cases, and with all
precipitated particles are sufficiently fine, is _blue_, and it can be
  In
which illuminates it, the direction of polarisation enclosing an angle

It is exceedingly interesting to observe both the perfection and the
  For ten or fifteen minutes after its
looked at perpendicularly, is absolutely quenched by a Nicol's prism
  But as the sky-blue is gradually
real clouds begin to be formed--the polarisation begins to decay, a

perfect polarisation, the residual light which passes, when the Nicol
whiter light of the cloud being extinguished.
that particles too large to polarise the blue, polarise perfectly
]  When the cloud texture has become
rotation of the Nicol ceases to have any sensible effect on the

The perfection of the polarisation, in a direction perpendicular to
experiments: A Nicol's prism, large enough to embrace the entire beam
tube.
butyl, were introduced into the tube, and they were followed by about
through aqueous hydrochloric acid.
the tube, I placed myself in front of it, my eye being on a level with

vertical, the plane of vibration of the emergent beam being therefore
  As the light continued to act, a superb blue cloud,
  But this
_utterly disappeared when looked at vertically downwards, or vertically
  Reflection from the cloud was not possible in these
  When the large Nicol was slowly turned round its axis,
of vision perpendicular to it, entire extinction of the light emitted
vertical.
downwards or upwards.
contemplated making on my own account, was first definitely suggested

As regards the polarisation of skylight, the greatest stumbling-block
makes the index of refraction the tangent of the polarising angle, the
made in air upon air; and indeed this led many of our most eminent
aerial molecular reflection.
polarisation is evidently a reflection of the sun's light upon
  The question is on what?  Were the angle of maximum
body, however inconceivable the existence in a cloudless atmosphere
water.
has satisfied us that 90°, or thereabouts, is the correct angle, and
reflected, if polarised by a single reflection, the polarising angle
angle, unity; in other words, the reflection would require to be made
  233.

polarisation of the sky.
water-particles on a hot summer's day in the higher regions of our
nitrogen of the air behave as a vacuum to radiant heat, the
in practical contact with the cold of space.

refractive indices, and therefore of very different polarising angles
incipient cloud, has thus far proved itself to be absolutely
  The law of Brewster does not
theory to explain why.
sufficiently fine, no matter what the substance forming the particles
the illuminating beam, the polarising angle for matter in this

Suppose our atmosphere surrounded by an envelope impervious to light,
of solar light could enter and traverse the atmosphere.
air not directly illuminated, the track of such a beam would resemble
cloud.
light in precisely the same condition as that discharged by the
  In fact, the azure revealed by such a beam would be
'
_artificial sky_.
connecting the polarisation and the blue colour of the sky, is
  'The more the subject [the
philosopher, 'the more it will be found beset with difficulties, and
it that of the blue colour of the sky itself, and of the great
'  'We may observe,
absolute that the polarisation is developed in its highest degree, and
materially impaired.
clouds.

the direction of maximum polarisation at right angles to the track of
variable ones, from the sun, 'neutral points,' or points of no
polarisation are at right angles to each other.
observations upon this subject which are reserved for the present;
following facts bearing upon it may be submitted.

through the laboratory air, exactly as sunbeams are seen to do in the
  I have reason to believe that a great portion of
particles, which are capable of imparting a perceptibly bluish tint to
  These also showed, though far less vividly, all the effects
  The light
polarised, though not perfectly, the direction of maximum polarisation
  At all points of the beam,
in the same state of polarisation.
and the selenite constant, the same colours were observed throughout
length.

could therefore be looked at very obliquely.
end of the beam, as it issued from the electric lamp, and, looking
observed the colours fading until they disappeared.
obliquity the colours appeared once more, but they were now

Hence this beam, like the sky, exhibited a neutral point, on opposite
each other.

in some way, by the vaporous fumes diffused in its air, I had the
  The
length of 14 or 15 feet being attainable.
effects observed with the beam in the laboratory.
uncondensed electric light falling on the floating matter showed,

When the air was so sifted as to entirely remove the visible floating
behaved like a vacuum.
_particles_, not by molecules or atoms.

brown paper, and tobacco-smoke, I had varied and confirmed in many
by Sir Charles Wheatstone to an important observation communicated to
 [Footnote:
 360 and 669.
 Govi had been led to
diffused the smoke of incense, and tobacco-smoke.
communication stated the fact of polarisation by such smoke; but in
in the beam, at the opposite sides of which the light was polarised in

But unlike my observations on the laboratory air, and unlike the
 Govi's
illuminating beam.
not aware that M.
further.

experimental tube became denser, the polarisation of the light
maximum polarisation becoming oblique to the beam.
fumes of chloride of ammonium gave me also reason to suspect that the
with the density of the illuminated fumes.

remarkable results: The laboratory being well filled with the fumes of
diffusion, the electric beam was sent through the smoke.
track of the beam polarised light was discharged; but the direction of
angle of only 12° or 13° with the axis of the beam.

was also exhibited by the beam.
beam, and a line drawn from the neutral point to the observer's eye,

The windows of the laboratory were now opened for some minutes, a
  On again
neutral point was found to enclose, with the axis of the beam, an

The windows were again opened for a few minutes, more of the smoke
  Measured as before, the angle referred to

This process was repeated three additional times the neutral point was
line drawn from the eye to the neutral point and the axis of the beam

The distances, roughly measured, of the neutral point from the lamp,


2nd observation   2 feet 6 inches.


4th observation   3 feet 2 inches.


6th observation   4 feet 6 inches.

polarisation had again become normal to the beam.

  In five
the gunpowder-smoke, the angles enclosed between the line of vision to
42°, and 38° respectively.

filled with the fumes of common resin, rendered so dense as to be very
  The direction of maximum polarisation
of the beam.
near the electric lamp, no neutral point was observed throughout the

When this beam was looked at normally through the selenite and Nicol,
  Keeping the eye
windows were opened, the blinds remaining undrawn.
slowly diminished, and as they did so the ring-system became paler.
finally disappeared.
rings revived, but now the colours were complementary to the former
  _The neutral point had passed me in its motion down the beam,

With the fumes of chloride of ammonium substantially the same results
  Sufficient, however, has been here stated to
point.
of the neutral point for skylight with the sun's altitude, a result
]
By a puff of tobacco-smoke, or of condensed steam, blown into the
greatly enhanced.
produced.
to its maximum strength, and then let an attenuated cloud of chloride
system flashes out with augmented brilliancy, but the character of the
  This is also the case when
the fine particles of phosphorus or of sulphur to rise into the light.
With the sulphur-fumes the brilliancy of the colours is exceedingly
character of the polarisation.

nitric acid is thrown into the beam, there is a complete reversal of
  Each of these clouds twists the plane of
black to white, and the rings themselves to emit their complementary
 [Footnote: Sir John Herschel suggested to me that this
change from polarisation by reflection to polarisation by refraction.
This thought repeatedly occurred to me while looking at the effects;
clearness.

polarise sensibly the light, and very beautiful effects may be
  When, for example, a cell of
slice of the beam is permitted to pass through it, scarcely any
plate of selenite.
the beam, the moment the infinitesimal particles reach the light the
the selenite be employed, vivid colours flash into existence.
more brilliant result is obtained with mastic dissolved in a great

The selenite rings, in fact, constitute an extremely delicate test as
liquid.
of light is necessary to make the polarisation of its suspended
  A much thinner slice suffices for common water;
any sensible effect with most other liquids, suffices to bring out

3.

The vision of an object always implies a differential action on the
  The object is distinguished from surrounding
  By
environment, we alter the appearance of the object.
clouds floating in the atmosphere with patches of blue between them.
Anything that changes the illumination of either alters the appearance
action.

foregoing pages knows, be in great part quenched by a Nicol's prism,
extinguished.
not only in the aspect of the firmament, which is really changed, but
background.
depth of shade that when the Nicol quenches the light behind them,
which outlives the extinction of the brilliancy of the sky.
less deeply shaded, but still deep enough, when viewed with the naked
cloud on a dark ground by the quenching of the light behind it.
a reddish cloud at sunset chances to float in the region of maximum
flash with a brighter crimson.
had just been cleansed by a snow-storm, wore a very wild appearance.
Round the horizon it was of steely brilliancy, while reddish cumuli
 When the sky was quenched behind them
they brightened like a fire.

and snows, so that the effects just referred to may be here studied
  On August 23, 1869, the evening
splendour.
turned from the sun, was tinted mauve; but I wished to observe one of
  Such a one was visible
  The Matterhorn also,
deep ruddy red lingered along its western shoulder.
peaks and buttresses of the Dom, in addition to its dominant head--all
  The
of the Fletschorn was all a-glow, and so was the snowy spine of the

Looking at the Weisshorn through the Nicol, the glow of its
prism.
  In one position
the rectangular position it was a dark mauve against a light
  The red of the Matterhorn changed in a similar manner;
definition.
which the Matterhorn almost disappeared.
quenched by the Nicol, and then the mountain sprang forth with
  The
  A vast amounts of light
of maximum polarisation.
easy to render the extinction of the light, or its restoration, almost
  When the sky was quenched, the four minor peaks and
the Alphubel, glowed as if set suddenly on fire.
dimmed by turning the Nicol through an angle of 90°.
stoppage of the light of the sky behind the mountains alone which
opalescent, and the quenching of this intermediate glare augmented

On the morning of August 24 similar effects were finely shown.
A.
 all three mountains, the Dom, the Matterhorn, and the Weisshorn,
  But in this instance also, the
beams, the effects on this mountain were most striking.
summit of the Matterhorn, at the same time, could scarcely be
quenched the haze, the summit became instantly isolated, and stood out
  It is to be remembered that in the production of
luminous haze in front of the mountains; that these are changed
polarised light, and that the light from the snows and from the
Nicol.
the haze _as an opaque body_ that renders the mountains indistinct, but
thus weakens the definition of objects seen through it.

perspective.
lower elevation, at the serried crowd of peaks, especially if the
peak and ridge is separated from the mountains behind it by a thin
unmistakable.
perpendicular to the sun's rays, it is in many cases wholly quenched,
polarised.
mountains very differently distant appear to rise in the same vertical
  Close to the Bel Alp for instance, is the gorge of the Massa,
  This ridge
Rhone valley, and between both we have the blue haze referred to,
  But at certain hours of the
mountains beyond the Rhone seem almost equally distant from the eye.
The one appears, as it were, a vertical continuation of the other.
haze varies with the temperature and humidity of the atmosphere.
certain times and places it is almost as blue as the sky itself; but
and from the trees which cover them.
piece of more or less perfect sky; it is produced in the same manner,
 We live _in_

These points were further elucidated by the deportment of the
are so well acquainted.
haze in the valley of the Rhone, as looked at from the Bel Alp,
  Towards evening the sky above the mountains
splendidly-coloured iris-rings; but on lowering the selenite until it
'valley, instead of the darkness of space, as a background, the
  I should estimate the
mountain, at nine miles; so that a body of air of this thickness can,
polarisation almost as vivid as those produced by the sky itself.

two parts; the one, coming purely from superficial reflection, is
the other part reaches us from a certain depth within the objects
which gives these objects their distinctive colours.
of the sun enters all substances to a certain depth, and is partly
reflecting the light, in accordance with the laws of its own molecular
 Thus the solar light is _sifted_ by the landscape, which
process, reach the observer's eye.
the darker colour of the pine, never comes to us alone, but is always

this superficially-reflected light.
may be quenched by a Nicol's prism, and we then obtain the true colour
  Trees and meadows, thus regarded, exhibit a
superficial light is permitted to mingle with the true interior
  The needles of the pines show this effect very well,
exhibits the most extraordinary variations when looked at through the

Thoughts and questions like those here referred to took me, in August
  The effects described in the
of the mountain.
  Both
perpendicular to the solar beams to be the direction of maximum

But at no portion of the firmament was the polarisation complete.
artificial sky produced in the experiments recorded in the preceding
natural one; while the gorgeous 'residual blue' which makes its
perfect, was strongly contrasted with the lack-lustre hue which, in

residue may also be obtained.

sky immediately above the mountains was powerfully acted upon by the
  In some cases the variations of intensity were astonishing.
have already said that a little practice enables the observer to shift
alternative extinction and restoration of the light immediate.
this was done along the arc to which I have referred, the alternations
mountains.
with which the mighty masses, ranged along the line referred to,

*****
The physical reason of the blueness of both natural and artificial
of the Imagination published in the second volume of these Fragments.


 ON DUST AND DISEASE.

Britain, January 21, 1870.


SOLAR light, in passing through a dark room, reveals its track by
  'The sun,' says Daniel
candle-light, and makes them dance naked in his beams.

compelled to remove these 'atoms' and this dust.
the space containing the vapours should embrace no visible thing--that
degree should, at the outset of an experiments, be found in the wide

For a long time I was troubled by the appearance there of floating
revealed by a powerfully condensed beam.
succession in the path of the air, before it entered the liquid whose
  One of the
caustic potash; the other, fragments of glass wetted with concentrated
absorbs the aqueous vapour of the air.
figured in Fig.
]  To my astonishment, the air of the Royal
dry it, and to remove its carbonic acid, carried into the experimental
was illuminated when the beam passed through the tube.
substantially the same when the air was permitted to bubble through

I tried to intercept this floating matter in various ways; and on
apparatus, it was carefully permitted to pass over the tip of a
  The floating matter no longer appeared, having
  It was therefore _organic matter_.
by no means prepared for this result; having previously thought that


contains fully 50 per cent.
  I have every
that the _floating_ dust of our rooms is, as it were, winnowed from the
  As bearing directly upon this point I may quote the
poussière que Pon trouve à la surface de tous les corps est soumise
les plus légères, au nombre desquelles se trouvent, sans doute, de
généralement que les particules minérales.

containing a platinum tube, which could be heated to vivid redness.
[Footnote: Pasteur was, I believe, the first to employ such a tube.
The tube contained a roll of platinum gauze, which, while it permitted
with the incandescent metal.
to enter the experimental tube, sometimes through the cold, and
  In the first column
on is expressed by the depression of the mercury gauge of the
  In the second column the condition of the platinum tube is
tube.



30 inches                 Red-hot               Optically empty.

combustion were present, the floating matter totally disappeared.


laboratory, I placed an ignited spirit-lamp.
and round its rim, were seen curious wreaths of darkness resembling an
  On placing the flame at some distance below
  They were blacker
steamer; and their resemblance to smoke was so perfect as to lead the
the alcohol lamp required but a beam of sufficient intensity to reveal
  But is the blackness smoke?  This
poker was placed underneath the beam: from it the black wreaths also
  A large hydrogen flame was next employed, and it produced
spirit-flame or poker.

had the honour to lecture was this experiment made.
was too scanty.
example--also lack the necessary conditions.

that is to say, blackness resulting from the absence from the track of
  When the flame
and the air, freed from this matter, rose into the beam, jostled aside
darkness due to its own perfect transparency.
forcibly illustrate the invisibility of the agent which renders all
  The beam crossed, unseen, the black chasm formed by
particles shone out like a luminous solid under the powerful

It is not, however, necessary to burn the particles to produce a
  Without actual combustion, currents may be
amid the surrounding brightness.
placing a red-hot copper ball below the beam, and permitting it to
water.


To study this effect a platinum wire was stretched across the beam,
voltaic battery.
was placed in the circuit.
temperature of the wire was gradually augmented; but long before it
when looked at edgeways appeared darker and sharper than one of the
  Right and left
definitely the non-luminous stream of air.
Simply this: The hot wire rarefied the air in contact with it, but it
  The convection current
dragging them after it right and left, but forming between them an
  This elementary experiments enables us to
temperature below that of combustion.

not only displaced, but destroyed.
long through the air of an ordinary glass shade resting on
  The wire being raised to
was forced through the cotton-wool.
and the air within the shade cooled, the returning air did not carry
  At the beginning of
end of half an hour it was optically empty.

upright supports were fixed, and from one support to the other 38
  The
which passed through the base of the shade and could be connected with
  As in the last experiments the shade rested upon
  A beam sent through the shade revealed the suspended
  The platinum wire was then raised to whiteness.
minutes there was a sensible diminution of the matter, and in ten

Oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, carbonic acid, so prepared as to exclude
the darkness of stellar space.
  An ordinary
track of the beam to be seen crossing it.
is allowed to enter the shade by a tube reaching to its top, the gas
  As soon as it
abolished.
gas and air above the beam, the track flashes forth.
is full, if it be inverted, the pure gas passes upwards like a black

The Germ Theory of Contagious Disease.

air; and the wonder is, not that we should suffer occasionally from
rarely diffused over large areas, should appear to be deadly to man.
And what is this portion?  It was some time ago the current belief
which consisted of organic matter in a state of motor-decay; that when
stomach, it had the power of spreading there the destroying process by
  Such a power was visibly exerted in
 A little leaven was seen to leaven the whole
being apparently competent to propagate indefinitely its own decay.
Why should not a bit of rotten malaria act in a similar manner within
question.
yeast-plant--a living organism, which when placed in a proper medium
process which we name fermentation.
fermentation was connected with organic growth.

same time; and in February, 1837, he also announced the important
ordinary air, and supplied solely with calcined air, putrefaction
  Putrefaction, therefore, he affirmed to be caused, not
sufficiently high temperature.
by the independent experiments of Helmholtz, Ure, and Pasteur, while
the same result.

probably by the great authority of Gay-Lussac, fell back upon the old
  It was not the living
oxygen, produced the fermentation.
'ferments,' mediate or immediate, to be organised beings which find in

Side by side with these researches and discoveries, and fortified by
  The
epidemic diseases may be due to germs which float in the atmosphere,
body of parasitic life.
perfect parallelism of the phenomena of contagious disease with those
  As a planted acorn gives birth to an oak, competent to
reproducing its parent tree; and as thus from a single seedling a
literally plant their seeds, grow, and shake abroad new germs, which,
take possession of whole populations.
knowledge in pure chemistry which resembles the power of propagation
epidemic disease.
small-pox you do not get scarlet-fever, but small-pox indefinitely
  The matter of each contagious disease
it) dog or cat.

  Pasteur's Researches.

parasitic growth.
of such diseases has been demonstrated.
you an account of an epidemic of this kind, thoroughly investigated
 Pasteur.
had raged among the silkworms of France.
in multitudes, while those that succeeded in spinning their cocoons
  In 1853 the
millions of francs.
doubled itself, and no doubt was entertained as to its further
  The weight of the cocoons produced in 1853 was
entailing, in a single year, a loss of 100,000,000 francs.

the celebrated chemist Dumas, now perpetual secretary of the French
  He turned to his friend, colleague, and pupil,
rendered almost personal, to undertake the investigation of the
  Pasteur at this time had never seen a silkworm, and he urged
  But Dumas knew too well the
declining it.
attention fixée sur la question qui intéresse mon pauvre pays; la
' Pamphlets about the
being broken, at rare intervals, by a more or less useful publication.
'The Pharmacopoeia of the Silkworm,' wrote M.
now as complicated as that of man.
been laid under contribution.
nitric acid to rum, from sugar to sulphate of quinine,--all has been
' The helpless cultivators,
pressed upon them with sufficient hardihood.
diminish their blind confidence in their blind guides.
French Minister of Agriculture signed an agreement to pay 500,000
infallible.
and found perfectly useless.

 Pasteur, yielding to the
June, 1865.
department in France, and it was the most sorely smitten by the

The silkworm had been previously attacked by muscardine, a disease
  This malady was
  Wafted by winds they
infection.
having taken its place.
black spots which cover the silkworms; hence the name _pébrine_, first
 de Quatrefages, and adopted by Pasteur.
_pébrine_ declares itself in the stunted and unequal growth of the
regards food, and in their premature death.
as regards the epidemic is this: In 1849 Guérin Méneville noticed in
their motions to be endowed with independent life.
showed that the motion of the corpuscles was the well-known Brownian
normal to the life of the insect.
self-multiplication, they are really the cause of its mortality--the
  This was well described by
only in the blood, but in all the tissues of the insect.
1857, discovered them in the eggs; and on this observation Vittadiani
diseased eggs.
extensively applied.

spread thence throughout the body of the worm.
cavities, the stricken insect often going automatically through the
  Its organs,
packed to distension by the corpuscles.
Pasteur fixed his entire attention.
is briefly this: From the fertile egg comes the little worm, which
  This process of moulting is repeated two
  After the
spins among them its cocoon.
chrysalis becomes a moth, and the moth, when liberated, lays the eggs
  Now Pasteur proved that
detection; they might also be germinal in the worm, and still baffle
  But as the worm grows, the corpuscles grow also,
  In the aged chrysalis they are more
the worm from which it comes should have been at all stricken, the

  The
eggs before risking their incubation.
and worms might be smitten, and still pass muster, the culture of such
  He made the moth

Pasteur made his first communication on this subject to the Academy of
  It raised a cloud of criticism.
forsooth, was a chemist rashly quitting his proper _métier_ and
subject which was eminently theirs.
si peu au courant de la question; on m'opposa des travaux qui avaient
l'inutilité de mes efforts, et l'impossibilité d'arriver à un résultat
  Que mon ignorance
quinze années.
  In
those produced in the successful 'educations' of the year.
could not understand the frequent and often disastrous failures of
Pasteur was competent to tell them, that the finest cocoons may
  It was not, however, easy to make
  To strike their imagination, and
of prophecy.
 Hippolyte-du-Fort, fourteen
  Having examined a
the prediction of what would occur in 1867, and placed the prophecy as
 Hippolyte.

  The
twelve out of fourteen cases there was absolute conformity between his
  Many of the groups had perished
prediction of Pasteur.
the prophesied destruction, half an average crop was obtained.
the parcels of eggs here referred to were considered healthy by their
  They had been hatched and tended in the firm hope that the
  The application of
and averted the disappointment.
at the same time submitted to Pasteur.
and his words were verified by the production of an excellent crop.
Other cases of prophecy still more remarkable, because more

Pasteur subjected the development of the corpuscles to a searching
the various modes by which the plague was propagated.
perfectly free from corpuscles he obtained healthy worms, and
worms the corpusculous matter.
food.
 Rubbing up a small
mulberry-leaves.
watched the consequences from day to day.
infected worms he reared their fellows, keeping them as much as
 These constituted his 'lot
 On April 16, 1868, he thus
 Up to the 23rd they remained quite well.
25th they seemed well, but on that day corpuscles were found in the
 On the 27th, or eleven days after the
intestinal canal found in each case invaded, but the silk organ itself
 On the 28th the twenty-six remaining
 On the 30th the
very striking, the sick worms being not more than two-thirds of the
 On May 2 a worm which had just finished its
 Its whole body was so filled with the

The disease advanced, the worms died and were examined, and on May 11
 They were the strongest of the
corpuscles.
poisoned them all.
cocoons, two only of their moths being proved to contain any trace of
of the worms.

precision augmented, and he finally counted the growing number of
 After
gradually augmented until finally it became cent.
 The number
and sometimes even to 1,000 or 1,500 in the field of his microscope.
He then varied the mode of infection.
the corpusculous matter, and watched the consequent growth of the
 He proved that the worms inoculate each other by the
 In various cases he
 He demonstrated
diseased worms.
worms spread infection.
problematical pythogenic gas--that killed the worms, but a definite
 The question of infection at a distance was also examined,
 As might be expected from Pasteur's
his manipulation finding fitting correlatives in the strength and

The following quotation from Pasteur's work clearly shows the relation
was engaged:
*****
Place (he says) the most skilful educator, even the most expert
symptoms described in our experiments; his judgment will necessarily
researches.
_pébrine_; the microscope will not reveal the existence of corpuscles;
cocoons leave nothing to be desired.
conclude without hesitation that the eggs produced will be good for
  The truth is, on the contrary, that all the worms of
carried in them the germ of the malady; ready to multiply itself
the eggs and smite with sterility the next generation.
the first cause of the evil concealed under so deceitful an exterior?
  It
or less prompt according to the epoch of life of the worm that has

*****
Pasteur describes in detail his method of securing healthy eggs.
is nothing less than a mode of restoring to France her ancient silk
  The justification of his work is to be found in the
success of his method, while editing his researches for final
  In both France and Italy his method has been pursued
  But it was an up-hill fight which

'Ever,' he says, 'since the commencement of these researches, I have
have made it a duty to leave no trace of these conflicts in this
' And in reference to parasitic diseases, generally, he uses the
disparaitre de la surface du globe les maladies parasitaires, si,
une chimère.

be absolutely isolated from the silkworm epidemic.
other epidemics, Mr.
exemption, for the ten years extending from 1851 to 1860.
registration districts of England, one only had an entire escape from
'In all the ten years it had not a single death by measles, nor a
  And
average amounts of other evidence of unhealthiness.
reason of its escape was that it was insular.
the Scilly Isles; to which it was most improbable that any febrile
  And its escape is an
of measles, nor any _contagium_ of scarlet-fever, nor any _contagium_ of
' It may be added
diphtheria occurred, and that, of those seven districts, the district

A second parasitic disease of silkworms, called in France _la
also been investigated by Pasteur.
send the reader interested in these questions to the original volumes
  To one important practical point M.
in a letter to myself, directs attention:
*****
Permettez-moi de terminer ces quelques lignes que je dois dicter,
rendriez service aux Colonies de la Grande-Bretagne en répandant la
maladie des vers à soie.
le mûrier avec succés, et, en jetant les yeux sur mon ouvrage, vous
d'éloigner la maladie régnante, mais en outre de donner aux récoltes

Origin and Propagation of Contagious Matter.

entertained as to the contagious character of _pébrine_; some stoutly
  But on one point all were
  I They believed in the existence of a deleterious medium,
was attributed the cause of the disease.
medical literature will not fail to observe an instructive analogy
  We have on the one side accomplished writers ascribing epidemic
hospitals and ill-smelling drains.
epidemic disease are formed _de novo_ in a putrescent atmosphere.
the other side we have writers, clear, vigorous, with well-defined
produces epidemic disease comes always from a parent stock.
behaves as germinal matter, and they do not hesitate to regard it as
  They no more believe in the spontaneous generation of such
 Pasteur,
as a disease among silkworms.
was merely the expansion of an already existing power--the bursting
  There is
  For though epidemic disease requires a
potent influence on its development.
but the conditions of temperature and moisture may be such as to
  Looked at,
energy which epidemic disease from time to time exhibits, is in
  We sometimes hear diphtheria
Mr.
of it began to rage in Spain (where it was named _Garrotillo_), and soon
well known to all successive generations of doctors.
1758, for instance, Dr.
Royal Society, particularly described the disease, with all the
name of _morbus strangulatorius_, as then severely epidemic in Cornwall.
This fact is the more interesting, as diphtheria, in its more modern
  Many
disappeared as mysteriously as it came; but Mr.
believed to be prevalent at this hour in some of the north-western

Let me here state an item of my own experience.
Alp in 1869, the English chaplain received letters informing him of
  He lived, if I
difficult to imagine how scarlet-fever could have been wafted to the
  A drain ran close to his house, and on it his suspicions were
  Some of our medical writers would fortify him in
another, and, in my opinion, a wiser school, would deny to a drain,

both by his boy and another, who, a short time previously, had passed

Drains and cesspools, indeed, are by no means in such evil odour as
  A fetid Thames and a low death-rate occur from time
  For, if the special matter or germs of
obnoxious otherwise, will not produce the disorder.
be present, defective drains and cesspools become the potent
  Corrupted air may promote an
  On the other hand, through the
regions where the drainage is good and the atmosphere pure.

seed has been wafted thither.
contagious matter of epidemic disease has been transplanted to the
  With a clearness and conclusiveness s
 William Budd has traced such diseases from
among populations subjected to the same atmospheric influences, just
 Hildebrand,
 de Mussy has
durability and the transport of the virus of scarlatina: 'Un habit
je portai de Vienne en Podolie, sans l'avoir mis depuis plus d'un an
contagieuse, que je répandis ensuite dans cette province, où elle
' Some years ago Dr.
himself was summoned to a country house in Surrey, to see a young lady
scarlatina.
been quite overlooked; but circumstances were recorded which could
complaint.
the scarlatina?  She had come there on a visit two months previously,
taken ill.
  The
an isolated tower.
months previously, a visitor had been confined with an attack of
  The room had been swept and whitewashed, but the carpets

Thousands of cases could probably be cited in which the disease has
has revealed its true parentage and extraction.
philosophical to take refuge in the fortuitous concourse of atoms as a
parentage may be indistinct?  Those best acquainted with atomic
than this, the potentialities of matter, will be the last to accept

The Germ Theory applied to Surgery.

seeking light and guidance from this germ theory.
antiseptic system of Professor Lister of Edinburgh is founded.
already stated, the germ theory of putrefaction was started by
Lister are of such public moment as not only to justify, but to render

Schwann's observations (says Professor Lister) did not receive the
  The
_Torula cerevisiae_; but it was not admitted that putrefaction was due
  And yet the two cases present a very striking
  In each a stable chemical compound, sugar in the one case,
the influence of an excessively minute quantity of a substance which,
  As an example of this
witnessed in the treatment of large chronic abscesses.
guard against the access of atmospheric air, we used to draw off the
consisting of a silver tube with a sharp-pointed steel rod fitted into
  The instrument, dipped in oil, was
the pus flowed out through the canula, care being taken by gentle

of air.
object, the patient being relieved from the mass of the accumulated
  But the
became necessary again and again to repeat the process.
there was no absolute security of immunity from bad consequences.
However carefully the procedure was conducted, it sometimes happened,
feverish symptoms declared themselves in the course of the first or
perhaps seen to be red, implying the presence of some cause of
have occurred.
the abscess by free incision, when a quantity, large in proportion to
fetid from putrefaction.
Without the germ theory, I venture to say, no rational explanation of
  It must have been caused by the
  Inflammation of the punctured
phenomenon.
it occasions the formation of pus, does not induce Putrefaction.
pus originally evacuated was perfectly sweet, and we know of nothing
something derived from the external world.
something be?  The dipping of the instrument in oil, and the
  Or even if
extraordinary assumption to make that these could in so short a time

vessels, through which arterial blood, rich in oxygen, is perpetually
evacuated at all, was liable to any action which the element might be

On the oxygen theory, then, the occurrence of putrefaction under these
  But if you admit the germ
  The canula and trocar having
them, and will be present in the angle between the trocar and the
when the instrument is thrust through the tissues.
trocar is withdrawn, some portions of this dust will naturally remain
abscess, and nothing is more likely than that some particles may fail
dislodged when the tube is taken out, and left behind in the cavity.
The germ theory tells us that these particles of dust will be pretty
is left in the albuminous liquid, it will rapidly develop at the high

But striking as is the parallel between putrefaction in this instance
produced, compared with the minuteness and the inertness, chemically
the similarity of the two processes.
the Torula of fermenting must or beer.
organism to be detected in the putrefying pus?  Yes, gentlemen, there
  If any drop of the putrid matter is examined with a good glass,
called vibrios, which indubitably proclaim their vitality by the
  It is not an affair of probability, but a
with living organisms as the result of the introduction of the canula
it was from putrefaction.
chemical changes that have taken place in the pus ceases to be
  We know that it is one of the chief peculiarities of
chemical changes in materials in their vicinity, out of all proportion
  And we can hardly doubt
liquid, and have grown at its expense, must have altered its
which we feed.
of Edinburgh.

of tissue laid bare by the knife shall be defended from germs; that if
  With
carbolic acid, which is particularly deadly to the germs, and he
bandages.
that we have a strict experimenter here--a man with a perfectly
and unwavering faith.
described by himself, has been, that even in the midst of abominations
where death was rampant from pyaemia, erysipelas, and hospital
terrible scourges.
Lister's 'Introductory Lecture before the University of Edinburgh,'
System of Treatment on the Salubrity of a Surgical Hospital;' and the

If, instead of using carbolic acid spray, he could surround his wounds
same.
and walls, this would be difficult, if not impossible.
acquainted with a class of wounds in which the blood is freely mixed
remarkable fact that such air does not produce putrefaction.
Lister, as far as I know, was the first to give a philosophical
thus:
I have explained to my own mind the remarkable fact that in simple
blood effused into the pleural cavity, though freely mixed with air,
  The air is sometimes pumped into the
wound in the pleura costalis, it inflates the cellular tissue of the
  Yet this occasions no alarm to the surgeon (although if
dangerous suppurative pleurisy).
cavity through a wounded lung, should have such wholly different
to me a complete mystery until I heard of the germ theory of
that air should be filtered of germs by the air-passages, one of whose
entering the air-cells.


on.

disease, hold that both arise, not from the air, but from something
  They hold, moreover, that this 'something' is
_particle_.
of division between molecules and particles; the one gradually shades
  But the distinction that I would draw is this: the
is never so.
the Aggregation of atoms or molecules.
been used in the Reports of the Medical Department of the Privy
and Dr.
probable, if they do not actually demonstrate, that the virus of
' Definite knowledge upon this point is of
are available which it would be futile to apply to _molecules_.


My own interference with this great question, while sanctioned by

behind the intellect, where it may be useful as an urging force, and
manner of delusions.
levelled their remarks against positions which were never assumed, and
  The simple history of the
observations referred to at the beginning of this discourse, and in
  For fifteen years it had
luminous beams through the air; but until 1868 I did not intentionally
the dust.
the observations which induced me to give more special attention to
epidemic disease, are thus described:
The Floating Matter of the Air.

light upon vapours, Fragment IV.
just referred to, the nature of my work compelled me to aim at
absolutely free within from suspended matter.
however, easily attained.

bright and pure they might appear in ordinary daylight, the electric
  The air was always
  All chemical

floating matter, but on admitting the air through the U-tubes
less distinct was always revealed by the powerfully condensed electric

The floating motes resembled minute particles of liquid which had been

  They
  I did not imagine, at the time,
the caustic potash and sulphuric acid.
the motes really came from without.
through a variety of aethers and alcohols.
long-continued action on the part of an acid first to wet the motes
  By carefully passing the air through
bright redness, the floating matter was sensibly destroyed.
therefore combustible, in other words, organic, matter.
intercept it by a large respirator of cotton-wool.
necessary to render the wool effective.
pretty tightly into the tube through which the air passed, was finally
  They appeared from time to
traced in the end to some defect in the purifying apparatus--to some
air-tight.
searching out of disturbances, the experimental tube, even when filled


An experimental tube in this condition I call _optically empty_.

understood by reference to a figure printed in the last article (Fig.
3.
from 1 to 5 feet, and which may be from 2 to 3 inches in diameter.
From the end s, the pipe pp' passes to an air-pump.
the other end s' we have the flask F, containing the liquid whose
fragments of clean glass, wetted with sulphuric acid; then a second
and finally a narrow straight tube t t', containing a tolerably
  To save the air-pump gauge from
observation, a separate barometer tube was employed.

pass air-tight.
b, on the contrary, descends to the bottom of the flask and dips into
  The end of the tube b is drawn out so as to render very

The experimental tube s s' being exhausted, a cock at the end s' is
  The air passes slowly through the cotton-wool,
  Thus

where it is submitted to examination.
the end of the experimental tube furnishes the necessary beam.


be overlooked.
cotton-wool to generate animalcular life, had been demonstrated by
evident to the eye.
light was scattered by the molecules of the air; that the scattered
removal of these abolished simultaneously the power of scattering
power from the air, and fixed it on something suspended in the air.
Gases of all kinds passed with freedom through the plug of
the gas impotent, could not itself have been matter in the gaseous
  It at once occurred to me that the retina, protected as it
converted into a new and powerful instrument of demonstration in

But the observations also revealed the danger incurred in experiments
hitherto bestowed upon them, such experiments left the door open to
  It was especially manifest that
often resorted to since, might lead to the most erroneous
destruction hitherto ascribed to them.
the luminous beam rendered evident the cause of success in experiments
the certainty of failure in experiments less severely carried out.

 Bennett's Experiments.

illustration.

Edinburgh on January 17, 1868.
13, pt.
 1868.
liquorice-root, hay, or tea, Dr.
forced air.
containing a solution of caustic potash, the other sulphuric acid.
'All the bent tubes were filled with fragments of pumice-stone to
passing through in the centre of bubbles.
through a Liebig's bulb containing sulphuric acid, and also through a

It was only natural for Dr.
entirely cut off the germs.
referred to, I also believed in their efficacy.
observations destroy any such notion.
fail to arrest the whole of the floating matter, unless it is tightly
 Bennett's memoir that it was
  On the whole, I should infer, from the mere inspection of
 Bennett's apparatus, the very results which he has described--a
cases, and its presence in others.

air, and five with common air.
fungi in them; whilst it required from four to nine months to develop
  In one of the eight, moreover, even after this
  In a second series of experiments there
  In a third series the cork stoppers used in
employed.
filled with common air, and other flasks with sifted air.
one of the former fungi appeared and in not one of the latter.
experiments simply ruin the doctrine that Dr.
espouses.

infusion when it was boiling hot.
 Bennett made a fourth series of
the flasks to cool.
air, and after a time found fungi in all of them.
conclusion?  Not that the boiling hot liquid, employed in his first
apparatus; but that air which, previous to being sealed up, had been
  This

  'It may be easily conceived that air subjected
of air, and that it is more or less unfit for the purpose of
'
Now numerical data are attainable here, and as a matter of fact I live
less density than that which Dr.
meriting the name of air.
chalets, with their flocks and herds, and the grasses which support
still.
prodigality at Alpine heights.

infusions.
unsifted air was pumped.

was also pumped--no fungi were here developed.
bottles containing an infusion which had been boiled and permitted to
  Finally, into
fungi were developed.
infusions were cold infusions, and the air ordinary air, did fungi

Dr.
they so obviously point.
defence of the doctrine of spontaneous generation, and a general
  So strongly was he impressed with
sulphuric acid tubes, that the appearance of fungi, even in a small
was to him conclusive evidence of the spontaneous origin of such
  And he accounts for the absence of life in many of his
examination.
through alkalies and acids, the results of Dr.
what ought wider the circumstances to be expected.
harmony with the conditions now revealed is a proof of the honesty and

The caution exercised by Pasteur both in the execution of his
evident to those who, through the practice of severe experimental
experimental work.
air.
employed, or to his own person.
sealed flasks upon the Mer de Glace, he had his eye upon the file used
stand to leeward when each flask was opened.
he found the glacier air incompetent, in nineteen cases out of twenty,
the lowlands, were soon crowded with living things.
 Pouchet
precaution of holding his flasks above his head, and obtaining a
  Now great care would be needed to render this
  The luminous beam at once shows us its
  Let smoking brown paper be placed at the open mouth
 A

of surprising violence, considering the small elevation of
the illuminated smoke.
would rise from M.
head, and thus the precaution of Pasteur, of not coming between the

Let me now direct attention to another result of Pasteur, the cause

filtered and clear.
germs it might contain, and, while the space above the liquid was
  He
and eleven of them in the courtyard of the establishment.
former, one only showed signs of life subsequently.
the ten flasks no organisms of any kind were developed.
others organisms speedily appeared.

obvious light in London.
large flask filled with the air of this room, and charged with its
side.
of the beam.
the beam is visible.
in our apparatus room, where it had remained quiet for some time.
Acting upon this obvious suggestion I set aside three other flasks,
  They are now
  Our former experiments proved that the
cotton-wool.
gentle air-currents, established by slight differences of temperature
which they adhere.
germs and all, and is practically free from suspended matter.

half being enclosed by four glazed window-frames.
truncated cone at the top.
  by 2 ft.
and its height is 5 ft.
  On February 6 it was closed, every
carefully pasted over with paper.
the dust within the chamber as it did in the air of the laboratory.
The chamber was examined almost daily; a perceptible diminution of the
  At the end of a week
competent to scatter the light.
stagnant caves of the Paris Observatory.
through the air of these caves its track would be invisible; thus
and its power to generate life.

the luminous beam than any hitherto described.
Professor Lister's interpretation of the fact, that air which has
memories.
through a wounded lung, should have such wholly different effects from
without, was to me a complete mystery, till I heard of the germ
only natural that the air should be filtered of germs by the air
dust, and prevent them from entering the air-cells.

verification.
authorised to write 'it is perfectly certain,' the demonstration would
  Such demonstration is furnished by experiments with a
  One evening, towards the close of 1869, while pouring
thought occurred to me of using my breath instead of the gases.
then noticed, for the first time, the extraordinary darkness produced
  Permit me to
  I fill my lungs with ordinary
  The
formation of a luminous white cloud of delicate texture.
this cloud by drying the breath previous to its entering the beam; or,
  The luminous track of
returning from the lungs makes good, in great part, the particles
  After a time, however, an obscure disk appears in the
of the expiration, the beam is, as it were, pierced by an intensely
  The
suspended matter.
by Professor Lister's explanation.
any number of times with the same result.
as a crowning piece of evidence both of the correctness of Professor
optically pure air.
 Burden Sanderson draws attention to
of a pregnant animal, suffering from splenic fever, is not found in
and holding back the infective particles.


The method of examination here pursued is also applicable to water.
is in some sense complementary to that of the microscope, and may, I
  In
the liquid, and the aim is to detect the individual particles.
present method a large portion of the liquid is illuminated, the
light.
light, and, thus defended, it becomes an organ of inconceivable
  Indeed, an amount of impurity so infinitesimal as to be
are so small as wholly to elude the microscope, may, when examined by
effects upon the eye.


developed in cases where no antecedent germs could possibly exist.
produced water from the combustion of hydrogen in air, justly arguing
  But he
and was allowed as water to trickle through the air.
experiment is one of a number by which workers like M.
differentiated from workers like Pasteur.
produced by allowing a hydrogen flame to play upon a polished silver
 The
electric beam it is seen to be laden with particles, so thick-strewn
  In passing
deportment of such water could obviously have no influence in deciding

We are invaded with dirt not only in the air we breathe, but in the
  To prove this I take the bottle of water intended to
reveals itself as dirty water.
other London waters.
have been furnished with specimens of the water of eight London
  They are all laden with impurities mechanically suspended.
But you will ask whether filtering will not remove the suspended
divided matter.
bibulous paper, it will continue laden with fine matter.
through Lipscomb's charcoal filter, or through the filters of the
thick with fine matter.
suspended particles is perfectly polarised in a direction at right
ordinary law of polarisation is a demonstration of their smallness.
should say by far the greater number of the particles concerned in
ordinary filter can intercept such particles.
impossible, by artificial means, to produce a pure water.

by hydrogen, but the water was not free from floating matter.
so hard to be clean in the midst of dirt.
Geneva, which has remained long without being stirred, we have an
  I have a bottle of it here, which was
  The track
trace of grosser matter.

seen hitherto--has been obtained from the fusion of selected specimens
  But extraordinary precautions are required to obtain this
  The following apparatus has been constructed for
large funnel, attached to which below the plate is a clean glass bulb.
In the funnel is placed a block of the most transparent ice, and over
  This is first exhausted and refilled
the ice being thus surrounded by pure moteless air.
previously been in contact with mote-filled air; it is therefore
which is to receive the water of liquefaction.
to melt, the bulb is filled and emptied several times, until finally
  We may be sure that all
 The water
  Still I should
  When condensed light is sent
exquisitely delicate blue.
so that the matter which produces it must be finer than that of the
  It may be and indeed has been, contended that this blue is
suspended in the water.
blue is approached gradually through stages of less perfect blue; and
obtainable from particles mechanically suspended, we should hesitate,
purification.
conclusion that, could we push the process of purification still

Chalk-water.

But is it not possible to match the water of the Lake of Geneva here
  We have in England a kind of rock
filter, and from which we can obtain water extremely free from
  I refer to the chalk formation, in which large
  Our chalk hills are in most
vegetation.
into the chalk, where any organic impurity which the water may carry
  Those who have scampered
scarcity of water in these regions.
washing the surface and collecting in streams, sinks into the fissured
  When this formation is suitably
  A large
to be wonderfully free from mechanical impurity.
reason that water wholly withdrawn from surface contamination, and
  It has been
the chalk holds in store could not be rendered available for London.
Many of the most eminent engineers and chemists have ardently
purity is unrivalled, but that its quantity is practically
  Data sufficient to test this are now, I believe, in
considerable, and the quantity of water which they yield so well

But this water, so admirable as regards freedom from mechanical
by the carbonate of lime which it holds in solution.
in the neighbourhood of Watford contains about seventeen grains of
  This, in the old terminology, used to
  This hard water is bad for
in solution is precipitated by boiling.
its hardness must be neutralised at the expense of soap, before it
  These are serious objections to the use of
  But they are successfully met by the fact that
  I had
not until recently, under the guidance of Mr.
proof of its larger applications.
supply of the city of Canterbury; and at the Chiltern Hills it is
  Caterham also enjoys

I have visited all these places, and made myself acquainted with the
  At Canterbury there are three reservoirs covered in and
summer's heat and the winter's cold.
gallons of water.
pure slaked lime--the so-called 'cream of lime.
with water, the lime and water are thoroughly mixed by air forced by
  The water
  The
leaving a perfectly transparent lime-water behind.

introduced a certain quantity of the clear lime-water, and after this
  The transparency
thickly turbid, through the precipitation of carbonate of lime.
precipitate is crystalline and heavy, and in about twelve hours a
reservoir, with a water of extraordinary beauty and purity overhead.
few days ago I pitched some halfpence into a reservoir sixteen feet
  This depth hardly dimmed the coin.
cast in a pin, it could have been seen at the bottom.
of softening, the water is reduced from about seventeen degrees of
  It yields a lather
  Its temperature is constant throughout the year.
hottest summer it is cool, its temperature being twenty degrees above
proper pipes.
them, and no surface contamination can reach the water.
direct from the main into the house tap; no cisterns are employed, and
  This is the kind of water which
Canterbury.


ascribes epidemic disease to the development of low parasitic life
the Royal Institution in January 1870.
reference to the polarisation of light by cloudy matter, I ventured to
these curiosities?  If we exclude the interest attached to the
the knowledge that facts often become the exponents of laws, these
  They will not enable us
  But
carrying thought into places which it would not otherwise have
  In
what it is.
own bodies?  The question then assumes a practical character.
on examination that this dust is mainly organic matter--in part
  There are among it particles of ground straw,
germs of other things.
economy?  Let me give you an illustration to which my attention has
 George Henry Lewes, who writes to me thus:
'I wish to direct your attention to the experiments of von
  They are striking
  Last spring, when
had been three weeks, a month, and five weeks, out of the body,
  This blood was
  Not only were the Amoeba-like movements of the
growth and development of the corpuscles.
still pulsating which had been removed from the body I forget how many
  There were other examples of
  Von
were not mentioned by him; but when I asked him how he represented the
in keeping the blood _free from dirt_.
raised to a red heat just before use; the thread was silver thread and
from air, were kept free from currents.
failures, and these he attributed to particles of dust having escaped
'
Professor Lister, who has founded upon the removal or destruction of
its introduction into the blood of wounds.
and become fetid; and when you examine more closely what putrefaction
life, the germs of which have been derived from the atmospheric dust.

permission I will refer once more to a question which has recently
  As regards the lowest forms
into two parties, the one affirming that we have only to submit
it living things; the other (without wishing to set bounds to the
to arise independently of pre-existing life.
which claims life as a derivative of life.
factors--the evidence, and the mind that judges of the evidence; and
throughout this long discussion, to see, on the one side, dubious
knowledge of what rigid experimental enquiry demands.
practically, what, again, has the question of Spontaneous Generation
  There are numerous diseases of men and
diseases may take the most terrible epidemic forms, as in the case of
article.
the parasites in question are spontaneously developed, or whether they
 The
two cases.

  Besides these universally admitted cases, there
clearness--daily, indeed, gaining more and more of assent from the
profession itself--the theory, namely, that contagious disease,
  Had I any cause to regret
that regret should now be expressed.
your presence whatever leaning towards the germ theory my words might
  But since the time referred to nothing has
  Let me
  From their
small-pox.
surely as a thistle rises from a thistle seed, as surely as the fig
thorn, so surely does the typhoid virus increase and multiply into
virus into small-pox.
here?  It is this: That the thing which we vaguely call a virus is to
  Excluding the notion of vitality, in
which illustrates this perfect parallelism with the phenomena of


In cases of epidemic disease, it is not on bad air or foul drains that
but upon disease germs, which no bad air or foul drains can create,
reproduction.
am putting forth views that may interfere with salutary practice.
such thing.
dealing with contagious diseases, you have only to refer to the
  Such diseases defy
  They must run their course, and the utmost that can be
  And this, though I do not specially
  For if
difficult to destroy either them or their progeny, without involving

It has been said, and it is sure to be repeated, that I am quitting my
  Not so.
a question on which minds accustomed to weigh the value of
which, in its present condition, minds so trained are as capable of
heat.
the biologist and the physician.
biologist or physician, whose researches, in connection with this
Pasteur?  It is not the philosophic members of the medical profession
of the profession itself.
story than by reading to you an extract from a letter addressed to me
 William Budd, of Clifton, to whose insight and
improvement.

 Budd, that is a matter on
  From the day when I first
specific cause of contagious fevers must be living organisms.

essence or distinctive characters of these fevers, without using terms
  Take up the
one, you will find them full of such terms as "propagation,"

characteristic of them--he cannot evade the use of these terms, or the
  While perfectly applicable to living
to common chemical agents, but, as far as I can see, actually
'
Cotton-wool Respirator.

you will allow me to call it so, must run its course.
is powerless to arrest its progress, and the great point to be aimed
  It was with this thought in
cotton-wool respirators in infectious places.
belief in their efficacy if properly constructed.
to prejudice the use of these respirators, by connecting them
  There are too many trades in
introduction of matters into the lungs which might be kept out of
  Dr.
stonecutters.

not obvious might be added to them.
that printing implied labour where the use of cotton-wool respirators
sorting of the type is very destructive of health.
ago into a manufactory in one of our large towns, where iron vessels
them to a heat sufficient to fuse the powder.
establishment was excellent, and one thing only was needed to make it
  In a large room a number of women were engaged covering
  The air was laden with the fine dust, and their faces

breathe air as free from suspended matter as that of the open street.
Over a year ago a Lancashire seedsman wrote to me, stating that during
so that many of them left his service.
him my advice.
to inform me that he had folded a little cotton-wool in muslin, and
had passed through the season in comfort, and without a single

Against the use of such a respirator the obvious objection arises,
  While casting about for
respirator invented by Mr.
by a slight modification, may be caused to meet the case perfectly.
The respirator, with its back in part removed, is shown in fig.


cotton-wool.
closely round the lips, and the filtered air enters the mouth through

During exhalation this valve closes; the breath escapes by a second
  The wool is thus kept dry and cool; the
suspension.

FIG.

*****
Fireman's Respirator.

thicket of practical considerations.

was a more serious enemy than flame itself, I thought of devising a

Our fire-escapes are each in charge of a single man, and it would be
penetrate through the densest smoke, into the recesses of a house, and

though found soothing in certain gentle kinds of smoke, it was no
  For the purpose of
 Pouchet spread a film of glycerine
which stuck to it.
was a decided improvement; still the respirator only enabled us to
irritation became unendurable.
smoke, there must be numerous hydrocarbons produced, which, being in a
cotton-wool.
residual irritation; and if these could be removed, a practically

I state the reasoning exactly as it occurred to my mind.
will be anticipated by many present.
condensing, in a greater or less degree, gases and vapours upon their
state of division, the force of condensation may produce very
  Thus, a clean piece of platinum-foil placed in a
cause them to combine; and if the experiment be made with care, the
  The
platinum to a state of fine division.
for instance, plunged into a mixture of oxygen and hydrogen, causes
  In virtue of its extreme porosity, a
  It is not strong enough to
it so squeezes the more condensable vapours, and acts with such
the combining distance, thus enabling the oxygen to attack and destroy
  In this way, effluvia of
excellent charcoal respirators invented by Dr.
  Armed with
having your nose offended.

ineffectual as regards smoke.
the respirator.
room, from half a minute to a minute was the limit of endurance.
might be exceeded by Faraday's simple method of emptying the lungs
atmosphere.
charcoal, and carries on it, and in it, its little load of irritating
  It is this, far more than the particles of carbon themselves,
  Hence two causes of offence are to be
and condensation, and the free vapour which accompanies the particles.
The cotton-wool moistened with glycerine I knew would arrest the
  In the
 Carrick's arrangement of two valves,
  But
substances, was prolonged to a depth of four or five inches (see fig.
5).
which fronts the mouth was placed a layer of cotton-wool, c, moistened
charcoal fragments; and finally a second thin layer of dry
  The succession of the layers may be changed without
  A wire-gauze cover, shown in plan under fig.
5, keeps the substances from falling out of the respirator.
of caustic lime may be added for the absorption of carbonic acid; but
found necessary, nor is it shown in the figure.
building, indeed, the mixture of air with the smoke never permits the
where the gas is present in undue quantity, the fragments of lime

In a small cellar-like chamber with a stone flooring and stone walls,
  We Placed there furnaces containing
prevented too brisk a circulation of the air, generated dense volumes
  With our eyes protected by suitable glasses, my assistant
pungent that a single inhalation, through the undefended mouth, would
  We might have prolonged our stay for hours.

  5.

of the Metropolitan Fire Brigade, asking him whether such a respirator
  His reply was prompt; it would be most
  He had, however, made himself acquainted with every
none of them of any practical use.
here, or to place a room at my disposal in the City.
came here, accompanied by three of his men.
with smoke to their entire satisfaction.
successively into it, and remained there as long as Captain Shaw
  On coming out they said that they had not suffered the
smoke.
and he afterwards took great interest in the perfecting of the

*****
Various ameliorations and improvements have recently been introduced
  The hood of Captain Shaw has been improved
 Sinclair; and
Mr.
  The respirator is now in considerable demand, and
  Care is, however,
  It must be
_clots_ must be avoided.
flannel which, in some cases, have been used instead of cotton-wool:

An experiment made last year brought out very conspicuously the
resisting smoke irritation possessed by our firemen, and the able
  Having heard from Captain Shaw that, in
from dry cotton-wool, and thinking that I could not have been mistaken
moistened wool and its associated charcoal, I proposed to Captain Shaw
  He was

certainly very diabolical.

therefore not in the best condition for severe experiments; still I
  With a respirator which
packed, I followed a fireman into the smoke, he being provided with a
  I was compelled to quit the place in about three

I then tried his respirator upon myself, and found that with it I
inhalation provoked coughing.

than those of his fireman, I proposed that we should try the
strong.
 Before
care, and entered the smoke in company with Captain Shaw.
hear him breathe long slow inhalations; his labour was certainly
cough.
proving that his lungs were able to endure the irritation seven times
  I continued in the smoke, with hardly
in it much longer.
placed beyond question.

assistance to a person in danger of suffocation.


In my lecture on Dust and Disease in 1870, I referred to an experiment
with animalcular life.
Binz of Bonn a short, but important paper, embracing Helmholtz's
remarks of his own.
medical men, was published in English, and though here and there its

From what I have observed (says Professor Binz) of recent English
English authorities are inaccurately acquainted with the discovery of
low organisms in the nasal secretions in this complaint, and of the
quinine.
originally announced these facts to myself, and to add some further
  The letter is as follows: [Footnote:
  Virchow's 'Archiv.
 xlvi.

the peculiar catarrh called by the English "hay fever," the speciality
season (myself-between May 20 and the end of June), that it ceases in
intensity if the patients expose themselves to heat and sunshine.
extraordinary violent sneezing then sets in, and a strongly corrosive
  This
membrane and of the outside of the nose, and excites fever with severe
from the heat and the sunshine.
symptoms vanish as quickly as they come on, and there then only
by the loss of epithelium.
years I had very little tendency to catarrh or catching cold, while
have spoken, and has never attacked me earlier or later in the year
  The condition is extremely troublesome, and
excessively severe malady.

suggested to me the thought that organisms might be the origin of the
  In examining the secretion I regularly found, in the last
could not observe_ in my nasal secretion.
.
small, and can only be recognised with the immersion-lens of a very
  It is characteristic of the common
which two pairs are more closely united.
0.
  Upon the warm objective-stage they move with
backwards and forwards in the direction of their long axis; in lower
  Occasionally one finds them
  Observed
somewhat larger and more conspicuous than immediately after their
  It is to be noticed that only that kind of secretion
slowly does not contain any.
lower cavities and recesses of the nose.

quinine upon infusoria, I determined at once to make an experiment
they did not cause the whole illness, still could render it much more
them.
quinine, which did not contain much of the salt (1·800), but still was
membrane of the nose.
very low, and poured with a pipette about four cubic centimetres into
  Then I turned my head about in order to let the liquid

'The desired effect was obtained immediately, and remained for some
the other disagreeable symptoms coming on.
repeat the treatment three times a day, even under the most

nose could not cure the asthma which accompanies hay fever; for this
nose.
]  There were then no such vibrios in the secretion.
only go out in the evening, it suffices to inject the quinine once a
  After continuing this treatment for some days
towards the end of June.

year (1868) I began at once as soon as the first traces of the illness
completely.

found no other patient [Footnote: Helmholtz, now Professor of
D.
practitioner.
] on whom I could try the experiment.
seems to me, no doubt, considering the extraordinary regularity in the
quick and decided effect.
probable, that the vibrios, although of no specific form but a very
symptoms in warm air, as heat excites them to lively action.

England--the haunt of hay fever--to test the observation of Helmholtz.
To most patients the application with the pipette may be too difficult
very simple but effective nose-douche.
apply the solution of quinine _tepid_.
often enough that quinine is frequently adulterated, especially with

Dr.
in which hay fever was cured by local application of quinine.
[Footnote: Cf.
' (1870), vol.
 p.
]
two cases of 'catarrhus aestivus' by the same method: a third patient
unbearable irritation of the sensible nerves of the nose.
autumn of 1872 Helmholtz told me that his fever was quite cured, and
method, and with the same success.
 Helmholtz, whom I
that he was quite convinced that hay fever was produced by the pollen
]
********************
VI.

1870.

  Portsmouth,
by smoke, and traversed by a drizzle of fine rain.
M.
on board the "Urgent.
permit of the ship's being swung and her compasses calibrated.
Admiral of the port, a man of very noble presence, came on board.
Under his stimulus the energy which the weather had damped appeared to
Spithead.
to swing the ship.

M.
successively past Whitecliff Bay, Bembridge, Sandown, Shanklin,
 Catherine's Lighthouse.
sighted the Isle of Ushant, on the French side of the Channel.
northern end of the island has been fretted by the waves into detached
  In the
green.
Biscay.
  There
cloud-forms were fine, and their apparent solidity impressive.
Thursday morning the green of the sea was displaced by a deep indigo
  The whole of Thursday we steamed across the bay.
blue sky, but the clouds were again grand and varied--cirrus, stratus,
  Dusky hair-like trails were

These were falling showers, and they sometimes occupied the whole
surrounded.
slightly changing our course, avoided a heavy shower.
time perfect rainbows spanned the heavens from side to side.
a bow would appear in fragments, showing the keystone of the arch
  In all cases
long diagonal tangent to the arc.
firmament were seen amid the clouds.
direction, the gleam could be quenched by a Nicol's prism, a dark

At sunset on Thursday the denser clouds were fiercely fringed, while

arc which sweeps from Ushant round the Bay of Biscay.
blue, in which floated quietly scraps of cumuli, were behind us, but
  It continued
  Towards evening the wind
plates and dishes from destruction.
the rolling had other consequences.
bed.
anxiously conscious that my body had become a kind of projectile, with
  I gripped the edge of my berth to save
  Outside, I could hear somebody say that
of the saloon.
incessantly quitted the water, and, twirling in the air, rattled

expected from a liquid, but with the sudden solid shock of
  'No man knows the force of water,' said one of the
' These blows
each of them, until, finally, the delivery of a heavier stroke than
  Furniture crashed,
  Amid the

something there had gone wrong.

  In the
navigating lieutenant, Mr.
at the tiller-ropes.
answer the wheel.
observing what steadfast adherence to an object can accomplish, and

hardly to move; still it did move a little, until finally, by timing
obtained.
  Round the saloon-door were
scientific observation.
  I
the only member of the party to be seen on the poop, and by his
 [Footnote: The
ropes.
  With the exception of the men at

I had seen grandeur elsewhere, but this was a new form of grandeur to
  The "Urgent" is long and narrow, and during our expedition she
 She was for a
  I
crests, rolling upon the ship perfectly parallel to her sides.
they approached, they so grew upon the eye as to render the expression
  At all events, there was no mistaking
and swung her like a pendulum.
which I estimated at over forty-five degrees; wanting my previous
cleat.
into heaps of greater height.
scattered them over the sea, the whole surface of which was seething
  The aspect of the clouds was a fit accompaniment to the fury
  The moon was almost full--at times concealed, at times
  These things appealed to
whistle and boom of the storm.

  I
interest the workings of my own mind.
ship.
foreign Government, and had been diverted from her first purpose when
  She had been for some time out of work,
  Our
but had been gathered from other ships.
also volunteers.
steamer shook under the blows of the waves, and I thought that
straining the "Urgent" would be able to bear.
me to look steadily at the worst, and I tried to strengthen myself in

But at length the helm laid hold of the water, and the ship was got
  The rolling diminished, a certain
  Our speed had fallen from eleven
  I went again to bed.
seemed crossing the vortex of a storm, heavy tossing recommenced.
was afraid to allow myself to fall asleep, as my berth was high, and
fractures.
sixty-six miles, or an average of less than three miles an hour.
overheard the sailors talking about this storm.
according to those that knew her, had never previously experienced
 [Footnote: 'There is, it will be seen, a fair
by a scientific correspondent of the 'Times.

against us.
  The
shone as white as Alpine snows.
greatly strengthened by a vast area of cloud, uniformly illuminated,
  From it fell a kind of
  The horizon at sunset was

perfectly continuous lunar bow spanned the heavens from side to side.
Its colours were feeble; but, contrasted with the black ground against

Sunday morning found us opposite to Lisbon, and at midnight we rounded
 Vincent, where the lurching seemed disposed to recommence.
Through the kindness of Lieutenant Walton, a cot had been slung for
  It hung between a tiller-wheel and a flue, and at one A.
 I was
  But the wind
  We
  But a new lighthouse came in
surrounding houses were declared to be those of Cadiz itself.
deference to these statements, the navigating lieutenant changed his
  A pilot came on board, and he
that the lighthouse was that of Cipiòna.
eighteen miles distant.

dark.
another vessel, and we did not get in.
night, and in the morning found ourselves about fifteen miles from
  The sun rose behind the city, and we steered straight into the
  The three-towered cathedral stood in the midst, round which
  A nearer approach
  A pilot was taken on board;
  The appearance of the
beautiful.
clean bill of health.
  They would have nothing to do
permission to land the Cadiz party.
English consul and vice-consul came on board, and with them a Spanish
  Under slight pressure
  We landed our party, and
  Thanks to the kindness of our

Cadiz soon sank beneath the sea, and we sighted in succession Cape
  The water was
  She swung with her
being almost horizontal.
us from the slightly rippled sea.
phosphorescence of the water, but tonight it was stronger than usual,
  A bucket let down into the sea
phosphorescence.
  And here an
beautiful to all.
distance of forty or fifty yards from the ship, a number of luminous
  On nearing the vessel they
side by side, and, in parallel trails of light, kept up with the ship.
One of them placed itself right in front of the bow as a pioneer.
These comets of the sea were joined at intervals by others.
as many as six at a time would rush at us, bend with extraordinary
  I
  The frontal
  The rush
every spark of which was converted by the motion of the retina into a
  Each porpoise was thus wrapped in a luminous sheath.
The phosphorescence did not cease at the creature's tail, but was

To our right we had the African hills, illuminated by the moon.
Gibraltar Rock at length became visible, but the town remained long
struggled.

and more, and finally all the lamps shone through it They formed a
  The sea was so
 Huggins and myself stayed on
  During our walking
observed, whenever the heated air of the funnel came between us and
  On passing away from the heated air, the flat dim disk
  The effect was one of
  The retinal image of the planet was set quivering
succession minute lines of light, which summed themselves to a disk of

At six o'clock next morning, the gun at the Signal Station on the
  At eight the band on board the
national anthem; and immediately afterwards a crowd of mite-like
  After the removal of the apparatus
  Winter was in
  The
with scarlet flowers.
of necessary courtesy, and I accompanied Admiral Ommaney and Mr.
Huggins to 'the Convent,' or Government House.
waited for a time, and were then conducted by an orderly to his
  He is a fine old man, over six feet high, and of frank
  He received us and conversed with us in a very
  He took us to see his garden, his palms, his shaded
took manifest delight.
quarters after his own heart.
engaged us on the spot to dine with him that day.

  While
a view to experiments on the colour of the sea.
 Huggins and
the library, where a model of Gibraltar is kept, and where we had a
  At the library we met Colonel Maberly, a
excursion.

directed to show us everything that we desired to see, and to hide
  We took the 'upper line,' traversed the galleries
opened like doors in the precipice, towards the hills of Spain;
 George's hall, and went still higher, emerging on the

Beyond were the Spanish lines, marked by a line of white sentry-boxes;
between both was the neutral ground.
the conical hill called the Queen of Spain's Chair.
aspect of the mainland from the rock is bold and rugged.
back from the galleries, we struck upwards towards the crest, reached
cheese.
  It
terrestrial curvature, thought he might look from the tower into-the
  The tower is riven, and it may be climbed along the
  We got to the top of it; thence descended the
falling slope, amid palmetto brush, aloes, and prickly pear.

Cottage' by a car, and drove afterwards to the lighthouse at Europa
  The tower was built, I believe, by Queen Adelaide, and it
Messrs.
  At the appointed hour we were at the
  During dinner the same genial traits which appeared in the
  The freshness of the Governor's
Mouravieff.

friends for ever.
thing to be remembered with pleasure.

  The views
ridge; but its aspect, end on, both from the Spanish lines and from
  There is a sloping bank of sand at
_débris_ of the limestone.
not the time.
 Busk, however, assures me that it is
ground.
Sahara.
throughout the entire voyage to Oran, was of a less deep blue than the
  Possibly the quantity of organisms may have modified the
  At night the phosphorescence was startling, breaking suddenly
bows.
  Having flashed brilliantly for a

past.

el Kibir, and beyond them the white walls of Oran lying in the bight
  The sun was shining brightly;
  The wisdom
demonstrated.
us in behind the Mole, which had suffered much damage the previous

  With three huge
the Mole; and here for a time the "Urgent" rested from her labours.

 Janssen, who had rendered his name celebrated by his observations
eruptions of incandescent hydrogen, was already encamped in the open
  On December 2 he had quitted
descended near the mouth of the Loire, seen M.
from him encouragement and aid.
encampment was visited by Mr.
Engineer of the Port drove me subsequently, in his own phaeton, to the
  It bore the best repute as regards freedom from haze and fog,
account of its distance from the ship.
the railway station, between two and three miles distant from the
  It was inspected, but, being enclosed, was abandoned for an
 Hinshelwood, a
in Oran.
manufacture of paper.
ground at the disposition of the party.
on the Saturday, by Captain Salmond and his intelligent corps of
the tents.

through which the highway passes into the open country.
the highway, and looking southwards, about twenty yards to the right
  Its roof I
of the surrounding country was unimpeded in all directions.
authorities kindly allowed me the use of this bastionet.
a blue-jacket named Elliot, and the other a marine named Hill, were
morning I mounted my telescope.
some hours of discipline were spent in mastering all the details of

Mr.
Oran.
  The
picturesque groups.
  We saw many

suspicion, or curiosity, hardly caring in fact to glance at us as we
  In one instance only during my stay at Oran was I spoken to
  He was a tall, good-humoured fellow, who came smiling up
' The mixed
rich and poor, varying in their costumes as their wealth varies; the
negroes, the Spaniards, the French, all grouped together, each race
interesting to me.

  The night had
  The sergeant of the sappers had taken charge of
  He brought back
instruments overturned.
equatorial from the Royal Observatory, Greenwich.
possible that this instrument, with its wheels and verniers and

instruments were restored to their places, and found to be in
  This and the following day were devoted to
  I had come out as a general stargazer, and not
particular phenomenon.
the advance of the moon, the successive swallowing up of the solar
mountains into Bailey's beads, the advance of the shadow through the
totality, the radiant streamer; of the corona, the internal structure
landscape with the naked eye, the reappearance of the soar limb
through the air.

adjusted, packed, and most liberally placed at my disposal by Mr.
Warren De La Rue.
considerable portion of the space surrounding it.
take in the extreme limits of the corona.
the large telescope a light but powerful instrument, constructed by
 Huggins.
excellent binocular by Mr.
  In fact, no man could have been

It required a strict parcelling out of the interval of totality to
  These, while the sun
eye-piece, which reflected but a small fraction of the sun's light,
  At the
reflector pushed in, so as to get the maximum of light from the corona

  Observe approach of shadow through the air: totality.

  Telescope              30 seconds.

  Finder                 30 seconds.

  Double image prism     15 seconds.

  Naked eye              10 seconds.

  Finder or binocular    20 seconds.

  Telescope              20 seconds.

  Observe retreat of shadow.

furnished with a lantern.
while I moved from telescope to finder, from finder to polariscope,
finder to telescope, abandoning the instrument finally to observe the
  All this we went over twenty times, while looking
  It was
leave no room for flurry, forgetfulness, or excitement.
not to be called upon, nor judgment exercised, but a well-beaten path
  Had the opportunity occurred, I think

But the opportunity did not occur.
been ill-natured.
the stern of the "Urgent" as rigid as iron, and to destroy the
  We had clouds, a thunder-storm, and
  Still the hope was held out that the atmosphere would
limpidity.
  Spaces of
on the relation of these spaces to the surrounding clouds.
them were to grow as the day advanced?  The wind was high, and to
a projection of the bastionet, place stones upon its stand, and,
  My practised men
bottom.

The clouds and blue spaces fought for a time with varying success.
sun was bidden and revealed at intervals, hope oscillating in
  At the moment of first
cloud had passed, and the encroachment of the black body of the moon
  The moon marched onward, and I saw
swallowed up.
through the middle of a large spot.
distinguished from the moon, but rose like a mountain above it.
clouds, when thin, could be seen as grey scud drifting across the
the intervals of clearness scantier.
with an interest bordering upon fascination the march of the silver
  It was so sharp
  No trace of the lunar limb could be observed beyond
  Here, indeed, it could only be relieved by the
  The blackness of
space.

Archer, of the Royal Engineers, had the kindness to take charge of my
  I mentioned, and he wrote rapidly down, such things as
  Thus my hands and mind were entirely
  A patch of sunlight fell and
  It was the only
  But to the north-west there was still a
  Within seven minutes of
  The
with humidity, which required but a slight chill to bring it down in
  This was furnished by the withdrawal of the solar beams: the
had so long rested.
in despair.
darkness was as obvious as a falling stone.
distant ridge, where the darkness would first appear.
fan of beams, issuing from the hidden sun, was spread out over the
  These beams are bars of alternate light and shade,
varying density.
of perspective they appear divergent, having the sun, in fact, for
  The darkness took possession of the ridge
 Janssen's observatory, passed over the
across them.
blue sky in the south-eastern atmosphere.
ridge.
afterwards the fan of beams, which had been for more than two minutes
  The eclipse of 1870 had ended, and, as far as the

Even in the heart of the eclipse the darkness was by no means perfect.
Small print could be read.
a dark one, by scattering light into the shadow, rendered the darkness
cloud.
none.
during the totality the wind was strong.
the bastionet, hoping to get a glimpse of the moon on the opposite
  The clouds continued, and some rain
  The day brightened somewhat afterwards, and, having packed all
 Crookes and myself climbed the heights
  From this eminence we had a very noble
  The

The able and well-instructed medical officer of the "Urgent," Mr.
Goodman, observed the following temperatures during the progress of


11.

55        55
12.

37        53
12.

43        51
 1.

27       53
  1.

10       57
The minimum temperature occurred some minutes after totality, when a

The wind was so strong on the 23rd that Captain Henderson would not
  Guided by Mr.
stratum of shell-breccia, and, thanks to my guide, secured specimens.
Mr.
Gibraltar, at approximately the same level.
Admiral Ommaney and myself drove to the fort of Marsa el Kibir.
fortification is of ancient origin, the Moorish arches being still
  About four or five
for a lull to enable them to embark for France.
was wandering in a very solitary fashion over the fort.
conversation with him.
but had effected his escape.
termination of the war, and predicted its long continuance.
bitterness in his tone as he spoke of the charges of treason so

The green waves raved round the promontory on which the fort stands,
height of a hundred feet and more into the air.
vehicle broke down through the loss of a wheel.
board, while I remained long watching the agitated sea.
horses of Oran well merit a passing word.
both of which are heavily drawn upon by their drivers, are

The wind sinking, we lifted anchor on the 24th.
went pleasantly along; but during the afternoon the storm revived, and
  When we came opposite the
into the bay, where, under the shadow of the Sierra Nevada, we passed
  Next morning 'a rose of dawn' rested on the
the lower hills.
of mountains as the Sierra Nevada.
the form also is such as to get the maximum of grandeur out of the
  We weighed anchor at eight A.
, passing for a time through
  The
  It has its
singular ridges behind.
standing on the cross-trees, saw the sun set amid a blaze of fiery
  The wind was strong and bitterly cold, and I was glad to
mast-head to the ship's side.
Mole of Gibraltar.

the Spanish lines, with the view of seeing the rock from that side.
is an exceedingly noble mass.
had been signalled and had come.
by transferring myself from the "Urgent" to the mail-steamer I should
  I hired a boat, rowed to the steamer, learned that
"
doubts as to the possibility of reaching the mail-steamer in time.
With his accustomed kindness, he however placed a boat at my disposal.
Four hardy fellows and one of the ship's officers jumped into it; my
immediately on our way.
twenty minutes; but we hoped the mail-boat might not be punctual.
a time we watched her anxiously; there was no motion; we came nearer,
  The men put forth all their

nugatory: still we were rapidly approaching the steamer.
she moved, punctual almost to the minute, at first slowly, but soon

We turned to the left, so as to cut across her bows.
pull would have brought us up to her.
my hat.
moment.
attention.
the fine fellows who had wrought so hard to carry out my wishes.

Point.

Governor had sent cards to the eclipse party.
not going.
 Michael's Cave is said to rival, if it does not
  On the 28th Mr.

his work, explored the cavern.
the sea.
in the rock, at some height above the true entrance of the cave.
this upper cavern we saw some tall and beautiful stalactite pillars.


simple carbonate of lime, which is hardly at all soluble in water,
  Even
softens it.
Graham, Miller, and Hofmann, in a shallow basin, fell from eighteen
  The softening process of Clark
  Here, however,
appropriated by lime, the half thus taken up, as well as the remaining
  The solid precipitate is permitted to sink,

We returned to the real mouth of St.
by a wicket.
were wet.
where tall columns sprang complete from floor to roof, while incipient
  The
up its carbonate of lime, falls upon the floor vertically underneath,
  Consequently, the pillars grow from
  It is easy
pillars.
protuberant rings, as if deposited periodically, while the latter
  In some cases the points of inverted

alike beautiful.

climbed and descended steps, halted at the edges of dark shafts and
  From time
 Crookes illuminated with ignited
drapery of the stalactites.
icicle-like spears, we helped ourselves to specimens.
difficulty in detaching the more delicate ones, their fragility was so
  A consciousness of vandalism, which smote me at the time,
beauty ought not to be at all invaded.
their natural habitat, nothing can exceed their delicate beauty; they
  In London they
  Of gathered shells Emerson writes:
   I wiped away the weeds and foam,
   But the poor, unsightly, noisome things
   With the sun, and the sand, and the wild uproar.

been called the Hill of Caves.
geologic disturbances which the rock has undergone.
these is the tilting of the once horizontal strata.
of torsion to act upon the promontory at its southern extremity near
character; such a force would twist the strata into screw-surfaces,
application of the force.
suffered; but instead of the twist fading gradually and uniformly off,
has produced lines of dislocation where there are abrupt changes in
 Thus, at the northern end of the rock the dip to
degrees; in the centre of the South hill, or Sugar Loaf, it is
  At the southern extremity of the Sugar Loaf
over and dip to the east.

other by places of dislocation, where the strata are much wrenched and
  These are called the Northern and Southern Quebrada, from the
  It is at these places
 Based
 Falconer and himself, an excellent and most
works of art which they contain, was communicated by Mr.
meeting of the Congress of Prehistoric Archaeology at Norwich, and
 [Footnote:
 Busk refers to the previous labours of Mr.
Jordan Hill, to whom we owe most of our knowledge of the geology of
]  Long subsequent to the operation of the twisting force

and numerous caves which, unlike the inland ones, are the product of
  The Ape's Hill, on the African side of the strait,
 Busk informs me has undergone similar disturbances.
one can rise from the perusal of Mr.
admiration for the principal discoverer and indefatigable explorer of
]
*****
In the harbour of Gibraltar, on the morning of our departure, I
  On the way
subsequent examination.
doubtful purity.
glass bottles, with ground glass stoppers, and at Cadiz, thanks to the
 Cameron, I secured a dozen more.
seven-and-twenty bottles were filled with water, taken at different

And here let me express my warmest acknowledgments to Captain
M.
 "Urgent," who aided me in my
  Indeed, my thanks are due to all
  The captain
Thorogood, who skilfully attached a cord to each bottle, weighted it
filled it under my own eyes.
vessels was thus avoided; and even the necessity of pouring out the

The mode of examination applied to these bottles has been already
 [Footnote: On Dust and Disease, p.
]  The liquid is
revealed through the light scattered by its suspended particles.
is taken to defend the eye from the access of all other light, and,
' Were
would, in my opinion, scatter no light at all.
luminous beam could not be seen in such water.
impurity so infinitesimal as to be scarcely expressible in numbers,
the microscope, may, when examined by the method alluded to, produce
'
The results of the examination of nineteen bottles filled at various

  Locality            Colour of Sea     Appearance in Luminous beam
1    Gibraltar Harbour      Green           Thick with fine particles
2    Two miles              Clearer green   Thick with very



 4
6    Beyond Tarifa          Cobalt-blue      Much purer than No.

     from Cadiz
8    Cadiz Harbour          Yellow-green     Exceedingly thick
9    Fourteen miles         Yellow-green     Thick, but less so

      from Cadiz
11   Between Capes          Deep Indigo      Very little matter,
 Mary and Vincent                    very pure
12   Off the Burlings.



                                             very pure
16   Bay of Biscay          Indigo           Very fine matter.
                                             Iridescent
17   Off Ushant             Dark green       A good deal of matter
18   Off St.


green, and bright green, taken in Gibraltar Harbour, at a point two
  The home examination
thick, and the third still less thick.
the suspended matter diminished in amount.

lieutenant, Mr.
adverse current which sets in, through the Strait, from the Atlantic
  He was at length forced to cross the boundary
sharpness.
other a deep blue.
filled with blue water, while at the same moment a bottle cast from
  Two bottles were secured,
  In the distance the
it was of almost inky blackness--black qualified by a trace of

What change does the home examination here reveal?  In passing to
matter becoming suddenly less.
disappears, and the sea is undecided in colour.
change, we have a rise in the quantity of suspended matter.
Tarifa, we change to cobalt-blue, the suspended matter falling at the
  This water is distinctly purer than the green.
We approach Cadiz, and at twelve miles from the city get into
suspended matter.
point fourteen miles from Cadiz in the homeward direction.
is a sudden change from yellow-green to a bright emerald-green, and
matter.
 Mary and Cape St: Vincent the water changes
being the concomitant phenomenon.

find the water between the shore and the rocks a strong green; the
  Fifteen or
which the suspended matter has in great part disappeared.
Finisterre, about the place where the 'Captain' went down, the water

and where the home examination shows the greatly augmented purity of
  A second specimen of water, taken from the Bay of Biscay,
was such as to render the water richly iridescent.
green, blue, or salmon-coloured, according to the direction of the
  Finally, we come to our last two bottles, the one
 Catherine's lighthouse, in the Isle of Wight, the
  The sea at both these places was green, and both
examination to be thick with suspended matter.

consisting of direct observations of the colour of the sea, conducted
in the laboratory of the Royal Institution.
noted that in the home examination I never knew what water was placed
  The labels, with the names of the localities written
the water being thus held back.
not till all of them had been examined, and described, were the labels
specimens ascertained.
been perfectly unbiassed, and they clearly establish the association
colour, and more especially of the black-indigo hue of the Atlantic,

So much for mere observation; but what is the cause of the dark hue of
friend Canon Kingsley, contains the following reference to this point:
dazzling dark blue of the mid-Atlantic under the sunlight, and its
sponson on to it without fear; this was to me the most wonderful thing
']
A preliminary remark or two will clear our way towards an explanation.
Colour resides in white light, appearing when any constituent of the
  The hue of a purple liquid, for example, is
  It cuts out
 The
  But while such a
the whole spectrum.
absorb the whole of the light.
similarly accounted for.
thickness augments, it attacks the orange, yellow, and green in
  But even it might be

And now we are prepared for a brief, but tolerably complete, statement

and the chemical.
rays are in part visual, the visual rays in part chemical, and vice
  The vast body of thermal rays lie beyond the red, being
  These rays are attacked with exceeding energy by water.
They are absorbed close to the surface of the sea, and are the great
  At the same time the whole spectrum suffers
of energy.
  As
follows orange, green follows yellow, and the various shades of blue,
  Absolute extinction of
uniform.
black as ink.
from its surface, as it would from the surface of actual ink; but no

In very clear and deep sea-water this condition is approximately
  The
the suspended matter, which is never absent, even in the purest
the limiting surfaces of strata of different densities.
light is thus thrown back to the eye, before the depth necessary to
  An effect precisely similar
  The ice here is exceptionally
in bubbled ice, the light plunges into the mass, where it is
pitchy blackness.
Welsh tarns, which are reputed bottomless, have this inky hue.

again, let us fall back upon the sure basis of experiment.
white dinner-plate had a lead weight securely fastened to it.
or sixty yards of strong hempen line were attached to the plate.

davits of the "Urgent," while I occupied a second boat nearer the
  He cast the plate as a mariner heaves the lead,
water.
  Even when the
  I
but at its greatest depth, even in indigo water, the colour was still
 [Footnote: In no case, of course, is the green pure, but
]
Other observations confirmed this one.
steamer, and right over the blades of the screw was an orifice called
the screw.
a great measure removed.
from side to side; on this I placed myself and observed the action of
  The eye was rendered sensitive by the
causes, Lieutenant Walton had a sail and tarpaulin thrown over the
  Underneath this I perched myself on the plank and
  In an indigo sea the play of colour was
the screw-blades, and that which had the bottom of the ocean, as a
  The one was of the most brilliant
  The surface of the water
  Liquid lenses were thus
concentrated upon others, the water flashing with metallic lustre.
screw-blades in this case played the part of the dinner-plate in the
 The
as the creatures swung to and fro between the surface and the deeper
  Foam, at a certain depth below the surface, was also green.
In a rough sea the light which penetrated the summit of a wave
upon the wave, even in indigo water.

Thus.
thrown into indigo water.
reaches an almost microscopic magnitude.
substantially as the larger plate, sending to the eye its modicum of
  If the plate, instead of being a large coherent mass,
diffused through the clear sea-water, it would also send green light
  In fact, the suspended particles which the home
or like the screw-blades, or like the foam, or like the bellies of the
  Thus I think the greenness of the sea is physically

We reached Portsmouth on January 5, 1871.
though its main object was not realised, has left behind it pleasant

********************
VII.

[Footnote: A Discourse delivered at the Royal Institution of Great
]
It is one of the disadvantages of reading books about natural scenery
distorted, often blurred, and, even when well drawn, injurious to the
  Such has been the fate of most of us
  There was little accuracy in the
  Startled by an
control of the judgment, and gave currency to notions which have often

A record of a voyage in 1535 by a French mariner named Jacques

named Champlain.
superior at Paris, mentions Niagara as 'a cataract of frightful
' [Footnote: From an interesting little book presented to me at
 Holly, some of these data are derived:
consulted.
by Father Hennepin, and described in a book dedicated 'to the King of
' He gives a drawing of the waterfall, which shows that
  He describes it as
not offer a parallel.
was more than 600 feet.
great precipice do foam and boil in the most astonishing manner,
  When the wind
fifteen leagues.
makes the height 800 feet.
de Maintenon, after referring to the exaggerations of his
part, after examining it on all sides, I am inclined to think that we
estimate.
  a hundred and fifty years ago, it had
holding that this has been always the form of the cataract, from its

As regards the noise of the fall, Charlevois declares the accounts of
to be altogether extravagant.
  The thunders of
base of the Horseshoe Fall; but on the banks of the river, and
surprising.
surrounding country being flat, and therefore furnishing no echoing
  The resonance from the
full, to thunder more loudly than the Niagara.

Niagara Falls, I caught, from the railway train, my first glimpse of
  Immediately after my arrival I went with a
  It may be that my
aspect of this grand cascade; but I felt nothing like disappointment,
the gradual interweaving of mind and nature, must powerfully influence
  After dinner we crossed to Goat
American Fall.
 Crossing
its edge, I looked long at the cataract, which here shoots down the
  It grew in power and beauty.
The channel spanned by the wooden bridge was deep, and the river there
unbroken.
beyond the base of the precipice.
Winds, is thus enclosed between the wall of rock and the falling

Goat Island ends in a sheer dry precipice, which connects the American
  Midway between both is a wooden hut, the
winding staircase, called Biddle's Stair, descends to the base of the
  On the evening of my arrival I went down this stair, and
  One well-known factor in the
  A
  This
cataract.
substance crumbles it away, undermining the ledge above, which,
recession.

the doubling back of the gorge excavated by the cataract, and into
  On the promontory stands a stone building, called
the decay of the staircase within it.

me.
the night, I watched and listened to the Horseshoe Fall.
here is evidently much deeper than the American branch; and instead of
and falls in a continuous layer of the most vivid green.
not uniform; long stripes of deeper hue alternating with bands of
  Close to the ledge over which the water rolls, foam
is sifted in its passage to and fro, and changed from white to
  Heaps of superficial foam are also formed at intervals

ship may be inferred with accuracy from the foam-streaks on the
]  Lower down, the surface, shaken by the reaction
  The descent finally
fall in periodic gushes.
the air, but is wafted through it in successive veils of gauze-like
  From all this it is evident that beauty is not absent from
  The plunge of
  From
projected against the opposite one, midway down; to the imagination,
plunges.

to explain, and the conduct which it prompts can hardly be fairly
  It seems to me a
he was unable to appreciate natural scenery.
Dean Peacock, 'no taste for life in the country; he was one of those
content to 'live elsewhere.
 Young, like Dr.
right to his delights; but I can understand a hesitation to accept

    To her true lovers.

see and know Niagara Falls, as far as it is possible for them to be

On the first evening of my visit, I met, at the head of Biddle's
  He was in the prime of
  My

Turning to a photograph, he described, by reference to it, a feat
him almost under the green water of the Horseshoe Fall.
me there to-morrow?' I asked.
perhaps, the chances of a man of light build, and with grey in his
  'I wish,' I added, 'to see as much
follow.
I shall be ready for you to-morrow.

  In the hut at the head of
instructions,--drawing on two pairs of woollen pantaloons, three
  Even
chilled; and he was right.
all.
helped to dress me to keep the water out; but his devices broke down

We descended the stair; the handle of a pitchfork doing, in my case,
  At the bottom, the guide enquired whether
remarking that the latter would try us most.
roughest done first, and he turned to the left over the stones.
were sharp and trying.
is covered with huge boulders, obviously the ruins of the limestone
  The water does not distribute itself uniformly among
  We
  At
  My guide

here, we shall get far towards the Horseshoe.

  It evidently required all his strength to steady him.
The water rose above his loins, and it foamed still higher.
search for footing, amid unseen boulders, against which the torrent
  He struggled and swayed, but he struggled
side.
' I looked
with the tumult of the cataract.
inspection of Alpine dangers, with the view of making them familiar to
places of difficulty to put the possibility of an accident clearly
the accident occur.
the water.
manifest.
presenting a side to it; but the insecurity of the footing enabled it
bear upon my back.
balance hopelessly gone, I turned, flung myself towards the bank just

The oilcloth covering was a great incumbrance; it had been made for a
occupied the centre of two bags of water.
again.
everything into account, it appeared more immoral to retreat than to
  Instructed by the first misadventure, I once more entered
  Had the alpenstock been of iron it might have helped me;
rendered it worse than useless.

hip well against it, I remained upright, and at length grasped the
  He laughed pleasantly.
first victory was gained, and he enjoyed it.
'was ever here before.
drift-wood which seemed firm, I was again taken off my feet, but was

We clambered over the boulders towards the thickest spray, which soon
  For the
tumult, lashed by the water, which sounded at times like the cracking
  Underneath this was the deep resonant roar of
  I tried to shield my eyes with my hands, and look
  The guide continued to move on,
lee, and observe the cataract.
the upper ledge, as from the rebound of the shattered water when it
  Hence the eyes could be protected from the
ledges remained to some extent clear.
guide's shoulder I could see the water bending over the ledge, while
spray-gusts.
  A little farther on the
and flew from it in a prodigious burst of spray; through this we
  We rounded the promontory on which the Terrapin Tower
Horse-hoe, until the boulders failed us, and the cataract fell into

Here the guide sheltered me again, and desired me to look up; I did
sweeping over the uipper ledge, and the fitful plunge of the water, as
 An
who regard man's ailments as purely chemical, to be met by chemical
  He contends for the psychological element of cure.
agreeable emotions, he says, nervous currents are liberated which
  The influence rained from
him if eaten alone.
amid the spray and thunder of Niagara.
there aroused, the blood sped exultingly through the arteries,
enabling one to think with tolerance, if not with tenderness, on the
  Apart from its scientific
  My
scene; but as I bent in the shelter of his large frame he said, 'I
' He rightly
  The name of this gallant fellow was Thomas

We returned, clambering at intervals up and down, so as to catch
  We passed
curious openings formed by the falling together of the summits of the
  At length we found ourselves beside our enemy of the morning.
Conroy halted for a minute or two, scanning the torrent thoughtfully.
I said that, as a guide, he ought to have a rope in such a place; but
did not see the necessity of keeping a rope.
  The
recovered himself again and again.
did as I had done, threw himself towards the bank, and was swept into
  Standing in the stream near its edge, he stretched his
  I retained the pitchfork handle, for it had been
  By wading some way in, the staff could be
  'If you are sure,'
then I will certainly hold you.
this, I waded in, and stretched the staff to my companion.
firmly grasped by both of us.
strong, I moved safely across the torrent.
  We
Cave of the Winds.
could not have been walked over with bare feet, but the felt shoes
  We reached the cave and entered it,
narrow ledge, to the point eaten deepest into the shale.
wind is from the south, the falling water, I am told, can be seen
hurricane of spray was whirled against us.
day, I went behind the water on the Canada side, which, after the

Still even this latter is exciting to some nerves.
himself is thus vividly described by Bakewell, jun: 'On turning a
the hollow between the fall and the rock, which drove the spray
through.
breath: I turned back and scrambled over the loose stones to escape
  The guide soon followed, and told me that I had passed
  With that assurance I made a second attempt; but so
way I could bear it no longer.
 of Nat.
pp.
]
To complete my knowledge I desired to see the fall from the river
doing so.
the winter; but this difficulty, through the kind intervention of Mr.
Townsend, was overcome.
sufficiently strong and skilful to urge the boat where I wished it to
  The son of the owner of the boat, a finely-built young
willing to go; and up the river, it was stated, there lived another
could accomplish.
  His figure and expression of face
  On Tuesday,
  The elder
struck immediately in amid the breakers below the American Fall.
hugged the cross freshets instead of striking out into the smoother
  I asked him why he did so, and he replied that they were
  The struggle, however, to prevent

The spray was in general blinding, but at times it disappeared and
  The edge of the cataract is crimped
  Here and there, a little
it and bursts from it in huge protuberant masses of foam and spray.
passed Goat Island, came to the Horseshoe, and worked for a time along
few days previously lying between us and the cataract.
before us, concealed and revealed at intervals, as the waves passed
  Our leader tried to get above this rock, first on the
  The water, however, was here in violent motion.
men struggled fiercely, the older one ringing out an incessant peal of
  As we were just clearing the
suddenly round and shot with astonishing rapidity down the river.
men returned to the charge, now trying to get up between the
  But the torrent set
  The tugging was quick and violent,
  At length, seizing a rope, the principal
hoping to be able to drag the boat through the channel; but it bumped
relinquished the attempt.

among the currents which rushed, from it laterally into the river.
Seen from below the American Fall is certainly exquisitely beautiful,
Horseshoe.
the Horseshoe Fall appeared especially magnificent.
across the neck of Mont Blanc can double its apparent height, so here
appeared lifted to an extraordinary elevation.
Hontan seen the fall from this position, their estimates of the height

*****
From a point a little way below the American Fall, a ferry crosses
  Below the ferry is a
lower down is the railway suspension bridge.
the river Niagara flows unruffled; but at the suspension bridge the
  Lower down the gorge
  At the place
300 feet, an estimate confirmed by the dwellers on the spot.
is remembered that the drainage of nearly half a continent is
imagined.
 Bierstädt, the distinguished
seeing these rapids; for this, and for his agreeable company to the
  From the edge of the cliff above the
an 'elevator,' because the effects are best seen from the water level.

and a motion of undulation--the race of the river through its gorge,
the obstacles in its way.
tossing are most violent; at all events, the impetuous force of the
  Vast pyramidal
as to jerk their summits into the air, where they hang momentarily
  The sun shone for a few
  At times the wind, coming up the river, searched and sifted
ones behind.
disappeared fitfully in the lighter mist.
common gleam of the sunshine from the waves and their shattered crests
  The complexity of the action was still
exercise of a local explosive force, the drops were shot radially from

The first impression, and, indeed, the current explanation of these
boulders, and that the jostling, tossing, and wild leaping of the
  I doubt
  At all events, there is another sufficient reason
  Boulders derived from the adjacent cliffs
  Against these the water rises

the wave-motion with he river-motion.
water would proceed in circular curves round the centre of
centre waves commingle, which have really been generated at the sides.
In the first instance, we had a composition of wave-motion with
  Where
furrow and furrow cross, the river is ploughed to a greater depth; and
the water which breaks the cohesion of the crests, and tosses them
  From the water level the cause of the action
generation of the waves, and their propagation to the perfectly
  If this explanation be correct, the phenomena observed at
principle of _interference_.
  Huxley informs

At some distance below the Whirlpool Rapids we have the celebrated
  Here the river makes a sudden bend to the

incessantly away.
sweep of the river prolongs itself in gyratory currents.
trees which have come over the falls, are stated to circulate here for
  From various points of the cliffs
  The rush of the river into the
visible, if one existed, you cannot find it.
the bend of the precipice to the north-east, the outlet comes into

The Niagara season was over; the chatter of sightseers had ceased, and
  I
increase.
banks--covered, at the time, with russet woods.
attaches itself to gyrating water, due perhaps to the fact that we are
  It is said
to be ejected mysteriously elsewhere.
emerald-green.
motion of the river swift though silent.
inclined, but it is perfectly unbroken.
no ripples with their breaking bubbles to raise a murmur; while the
the surface.
mirror formed by the Niagara, in sliding from the whirlpool.

Fragment.
opportunities of testing the explanation there given.
down upon, there are portions of the ocean to which we should hardly
the eye.
indication both of its depth and of its freedom from mechanically
  In small thicknesses water is sensibly transparent
low refrangibility are first absorbed, and after them the other rays.
Where, therefore, the water is very deep and very pure, all the
light is sent from its interior to the eye.
Atlantic Ocean to this condition is an indication of its extreme

Throw a white pebble into such water; as it sinks it becomes greener

unbroken mass; grind the pebble to powder, every particle will yield
suspended in the water, the scattered light will be a uniform green.
Hence the greenness of shoal water.
Atlantic around you.
and correctly infer that you are crossing the bank of Newfoundland.
Such water is found charged with fine matter in a state of mechanical
  The light from the bottom may sometimes come into play,
  A storm can render the water muddy, by
  Such a case occurred
  There had been rain and
brought down quite extinguished the fascinating green of the

Nothing can be more superb than the green of the Atlantic waves, when
  As
just doubles over the crest, like an Alpine snow-cornice, under the
  It is
  But the foam is necessary to its
  The foam is first illuminated, and it scatters the light
of the wave alone reaches the eye, and gives to that portion its
  The folding of the wave, producing as it does, a
cylindrical lenses, introduces variations in the intensity of the

*****
We have now to consider the genesis and proximate destiny of the Falls
  We may open our way to this subject by a few preliminary
  Time and intensity are the main factors of
  A
through short ones, may produce approximately the same results.
Dr.
first examples of which were picked up by Mr.
of Lyell's Bay, near Wellington, in New Zealand.
by Mr.
'
forms to human workmanship.
being apparently chiselled off into facets, with as much attention to
them.
stones.
wind-blown sand of Lyell's Bay.
they in succession urged the sand against opposite sides of the stone;
stone, and in the end sculptured these singular forms.
'These stones, which have a strong resemblance to works of human art,
several inches in length.
various forms, which are those of wedges, knives, arrow-heads, &c, and

'Mr.
appearance, these stones were formed by the cutting action of the
boulder-bank.
varieties of form are produced, and referred to the effect which the
executed on sandy tracts.

 Hector stated that although, as a group, the specimens on the
forms are so peculiar, and the edges, in a few of them, so perfect,
doubt that they would have been referred to the so-called "stone
"'--Extracted from the Minutes of the Wellington Philosophical
]
The Sphynx of Egypt is nearly covered up by the sand of the desert.
The neck of the Sphynx is partly cut across, not, as I am assured by
 Huxley, by ordinary weathering, but by the eroding action of the
  In these cases Nature furnishes us with
has been recently turned to extraordinary account in the United
  When in Boston, I was taken by my courteous and helpful
 Josiah Quincey, to see the action of the sand-blast.
kind of hopper containing fine silicious sand was connected with a

  A
under it; it came out perfectly depolished, with a bright opalescent

energy concentrated on the point of impact, formed there a little pit,
description.

  By protecting certain portions of the surface,
etched upon the glass.
copied; while wire-gauze placed over the glass produced a reticulated
  But it required no such resisting substance as iron to
  The patterns of the finest lace could be thus
sufficient protection.
simple model of the sand-blast devised by my assistant.
a minute suffices to etch upon glass a rich and beautiful lace
  Any yielding substance may be employed to protect the glass.
By diffusing the shock of the particle, such substances practically
  The hand can bear, without
  Etchings
by the sandblast.
surface, the greater is the concentration of the shock, and the more
  It is not necessary that the sand should be
than quartz; still, quartz-sand can not only depolish, but actually
  Nay, glass may be depolished
glass, before they have time to flatten and turn their energy into

And here, in passing, we may tie together one or two apparently
  Supposing you turn on, at the lower part of a house,
the column of water, from the cistern downwards, is set in motion.
turning off the cock, this motion is stopped; and, when the turning
internal impact of the water.
over half a second of time, the shock and danger of rupture may be
  We have here an example of the concentration of
  The sand-blast illustrates the concentration of
  The action of flint and steel is an illustration of
  The heat required to generate the spark is
fire, be in the highest degree concentrated.
secured by the collision of hard substances.
supply the place of flint, nor lead the place of steel, in the
  With the softer substances, the
produce the spark, the heat must be intensely localised.

have already said that quartz-sand can wear a hole through corundum.
This leads me to express my acknowledgments to General Tilghman, who
 [Footnote: The absorbent power,
States, is forcibly illustrated by the rapid transfer of men like
 Tilghman from the life of the soldier to that of the civilian.
General McClellan, now a civil engineer, whom I had the honour of
kind.
thus drawn, in an astonishingly short time, from military to civil
]  To his spontaneous kindness I am indebted for some beautiful
  In one thick plate of glass a figure
  A second
  In a
intricate and elaborate description has been executed.
probably take many days to perform this work by any ordinary process;
  So much for the
example of line engraving, etched on glass by means of the Blast.

air, renders us better able to conceive its action when urged by
  The erosive power of a river is vastly augmented by the solid
  Sand or pebbles, caught in a river
shafts being thus produced.
erosion is to be seen in the Val Tournanche, above the village of this
  The gorge at Handeck has been thus cut out.
were once frequent in the valleys of Switzerland; for hardly any
material, over which the river flowing through the valley once fell as
  Near Pontresina, in the Engadin, there is such a case; a
river from the Morteratsch glacier rushes.
above Meyringen is also a case in point.
derived from the glacier of the Aar, and over the barrier the lake
  Here the rock, being limestone, was in
gravel carried along by the water, which, on striking the rock,
 Thus, by
Finsteraarschlucht was formed.
which flows at the bottoms of such deep fissures once flowed at the
barriers.
this kind; the untenable hypothesis of earthquakes, once so readily
part abandoned.
cause is needed than the integration of effects individually

And now we come to Niagara.
of the country, the conviction appears to have arisen that the deep
cataract.
 Bakewell's 'Introduction to Geology,' the prevalence
  It is expressed thus by
[Footnote: Quoted by Bakewell.
falls, and the features of the country round, it is impossible not to
formed by the continued action of the irresistible Niagara, and that
back the rocky strata to their present site.
advocated by Sir Charles Lyell, by Mr.
 Agassiz, by
place.

obtained.
side of the river, we have to our left the deep and comparatively
  The bounding cliffs of
  We reach the whirlpool,
northward course.
falls, we come to the edge of a declivity, which informs us that we
  At some hundreds of feet
Ontario.
Niagara.
in a widened bed pursues its way to the lake which finally receives

The fact that in historic times, even within the memory of man, the
recession gone?  At what point did the ledge which thus continually
such researches the answer has been, and will be--At the precipitous
Queenston on the Canadian side.
united affluents of all the upper lakes once poured their waters, and
  The dam, moreover, was demonstrably
Island; and this would perfectly account for the finding by Sir
 Hall, and others, in the sand and gravel of the
River higher up.
sides of the river, the discovery of which enabled Lyell, Hall, and
once flowed through a shallow valley.

mind before quitting Niagara, are revealed by a close inspection of
  We see evidently that the greatest weight
  In a passage in
 Hall alludes to this fact.
Here we have the most copious and the most violent whirling of the
shale.
rises without solution of continuity to the region of clouds, becoming
of true cloud into invisible vapour, which is sometimes reprecipitated
  All the phenomena point distinctly to the centre of the
the vigour of the fall gradually dies away towards the sides.
Horseshoe form, with the concavity facing downwards, is an obvious and
  Right along the middle of the
the centre a deep and comparatively narrow groove, and draining the
 [Footnote: In the discourse the excavation of
devised by my assistant, Mr.
]  Hence the remarkable
Horseshoe.
position, the form of the fall was probably that of a horseshoe; for
greater excavating power, of the centre of the river.
moreover, varies in width, as the depth of the centre of the ancient

The vast comparative erosive energy of the Horseshoe Fall comes
together.
the gorge of the Niagara.
excavator.
American Fall tumbles.
the American Fall has been almost nil, while the Horseshoe has cut its
back to excavate its channel parallel to the length of the island.
This point, which impressed me forcibly, has not, I have just learned,
 [Footnote: His
edge has only receded a few yards (where most eroded) during the time
Island to the innermost curve of the Horseshoe Fall.
Journal of Geological Society, May 1859.
Horseshoe immediately accommodates itself to the bending, and will
stream.
river channel above it.
sinuous, the gorge would obediently follow its sinuosities.
suggested, no doubt geographers will be able to point out many
  The Zambesi is thought to present a great
chasm below the Victoria Falls.
tolerably uniform texture, had the river been examined before the
gorge below the fall could, I am persuaded, have been predicted, while
course to be pursued by the erosion in the future.

the chips of its own workshop.
easily carried away.
boulders already described, and by some means or other these are
  The ice which fills the gorge in winter, and
transporting agent.
  But erosion
withdrawing their support and urging them gradually down the river.
Solution also does its portion of the work.
carried down is proved by the difference of depth between the Niagara
  The depth falls
matter caused by the diminished motion of the river.
the mouth of the gorge at Queenston, the depth, according to the
]
The annexed highly instructive map has been reduced from one published
 Hall's 'Geology of New York.
in 1842, by Messrs.
  The ragged edge of the
it has been able to accomplish, while the Horseshoe Fall was cutting
position.
not by itself, but by the Horseshoe Fall.
feet high, and, as shown by the map, is already turning eastward, to
  P is the apex
promontory adjacent, round which I was conducted by Conroy.
since 1842 the Horseshoe has worked back beyond the position here

In conclusion, we may say a word regarding the proximate future of
  At the rate of excavation assigned to it by Sir Charles
Horseshoe Fall far higher than Goat Island.
will drain, as it has hitherto done, the banks right and left of it,
of the gorge.
the river; the channel of which in due time will become cultivable
  The American Fall will then be transformed into a dry
Niagara gorge.
shall have the gorge enclosing a right angle, a second whirlpool being
  To those who visit Niagara a few millenniums hence I
  All that can be said is,
literally true.


  6.


A year or so after I had quitted the United States, a man sixty years
Goat Island with the Three Sisters, slipped through the rails of the
Horseshoe Fall.
water, and with the grasp of desperation he clung to it.
population of the village of Niagara Falls was soon upon the island,
  In the midst
his way silently through the crowd.
the bystanders a number of men, and placed one end of the rope in
  The other end he fastened round himself, and choosing a
the rapids.
rock, secured the old painter and saved him.
parts of the Union poured in upon me, describing this gallant act of

********************
VIII.

[Footnote: A discourse delivered at the Royal Institution of Great
]
THE first published allusion to the Parallel Roads of Glen Roy occurs
work published in 1776.
writer, 'both sides of the glen, there are three roads at small
  These
be 26 paces of a man 5 feet 10 inches high.
pretty near each other, about 50 yards, and the lowest double that
  They are carried along the sides of
line of rule and compass.

1150, 1070, and 860 feet above the sea.
80 feet separates the two highest, while the lowest road is 210 feet

These 'roads' are usually shelves or terraces formed in the yielding
  They are all
  Pennant accepted as
time.
that the terraces were made after the spots were cleared in lines from
were rouzed, in order that they might come within reach of the bowmen
'
In these attempts of 'the country people' we have an illustration of
know the causes of things; and it is a matter of surprise that in the
enquiry, this impulse did not make itself more rapidly and
  Their remoteness may perhaps account for the fact
scientific attempt at an explanation of them, appeared.
Dr.
presented to that Society a memoir, in which the roads were discussed,

these particular levels, was left unexplained.

 MacCulloch succeeded a man, possibly not so learned as a
and to put them in their proper setting.
Dick-Lauder, who presented to the Royal Society of Edinburgh, on the
  Roy.
looking over the literature of this subject, which is now copious, it
out those who went by a kind of instinct to the core of the question,
its analogies, adjuncts, and details.
connected with the history of the subject, who has shown, in relation
more conspicuously than Sir Thomas Dick-Lauder.
processes are involved in the treatment of such a question.
the faithful and sufficient observation of the data; and secondly,
into play, connecting the separate facts of observation with their
  In neither of

Adjacent to Glen Roy is a valley called Glen Gluoy, along the sides of
manner as the parallel roads of Glen Roy.
opposing sides of the glen were at precisely the same level, and
head of the glen.
mountains.
them, until finally, at the head of Glen Gluoy, he reached a col, or
round the glen.

say, 20 feet above the highest road in Glen Roy.

Roy.
latter glen, and pursued it exactly as he had pursued the road in Glen
  For a time it belted the mountain sides at a considerable
coming ever nearer to the highest shelf, until finally he reached a
elevation as the highest road of Glen Roy.

towards the mouth of the glen.
valley gradually increased; not because the shelf rose, but because it
  He found this
running along the sides of the mountains which flank Glen Spean.
followed it eastwards.


After a Sketch by Sir Thomas Dick-Lauder.

therefore gradually approached the road on the adjacent mountain-side.
He came to Loch Laggan, the surface of which rose almost to the level
other two cases, a col, or watershed, at Makul, of exactly the same
is a continuation of the lowest road in Glen Roy.

solution of this problem.
image from such facts may be compared with the effort of the eyes to
  For a time we

forth in clear and definite relief.
of his ponderings upon the mind of Sir Thomas Dick-Lauder.
solution was this: Taking all their features into account, he was
  But how
mouth of Glen Gluoy to be stopped by a barrier sufficiently high, if
collect, they would form behind the barrier a lake, the surface of
the head of the glen.
water of Glen Gluoy discharging itself over the col into Glen Roy.
long as the barrier stopping the mouth of Glen Gluoy continued high
shelf, which lake, acting upon the loose drift of the flanking

So much for Glen Gluoy.
stopped by a similar barrier.
adjacent mountains would collect.
would gradually rise, until it had reached the level of the col which
  Here the rising of the lake would
valley of the Spey.
sufficiently high barrier remained at the mouth of Glen Roy.
thus dammed in, with its surface at the level of the highest parallel
overspreading the mountains, and would form the highest road or

And now let us suppose the barrier to be so far removed from the mouth
of Glen Spean, while the lower part of the latter glen still continued
  Upper Glen Spean and Glen Roy would then be
determined by the col at the head of Loch Laggan.
Roy would sink from the level it had previously maintained, to the
  This new lake-surface would
that road by its action upon the drift of the adjacent mountains.

strongly to the scientific mind.
the character of the assumed barrier which stopped the glens?  There
of Glen Spean, and of such detritus Sir Thomas Dick-Lauder imagined
  By some unknown convulsion, this
  But, once given, and once granted that
of Glen Gluoy and the highest and lowest roads of Glen Roy would be

To account for the second or middle road of Glen Roy, Sir Thomas
  He supposed that at a certain point
holding its ground at a particular level sufficiently long to dam a
  This point
 Darwin, and adduced by him as
feature in the phenomena of the parallel roads.
Sir Thomas Dick-Lauder's theory was seriously shaken by this argument,
to remove such source of weakness.
 David
 Milne-Home.
pass the mouth of a lateral glen, called Glen Glaster, running
  There is nothing in this lateral glen to
influence in the production of the parallel roads.
the failure of Sir Thomas Dick-Lauder to notice it.

and lowest roads are fairly shown.
through the glen turns at a certain point northwards and loses itself
  But another branch of the

second Glen Roy road.
far removed as to open this col, the water in Glen Roy would sink to
  A new lake of diminished depth would be
Glaster col into Glen Spean.
the detrital matter, would form the second road.
Thomas Dick-Lauder, as regards the part played by the cols, was

I have referred to Mr.
the convictions of the scientific world in relation to this question.
His notion was--and it is a notion which very naturally presents
whole region was once submerged and subsequently upheaved; that there
constituted so many fiords, on the sides of which the parallel
  This theory will not bear close criticism; nor
 Darwin himself.
the sea being 20 feet higher in Glen Gluoy than in Glen Roy.
not account for the absence of the second and third Glen Roy roads
as in Glen Roy.
from the other mountains in the neighbourhood, all of which 'would
  Here then, and
 Darwin has shown himself to be fallible; but
surrender to evidence which girds his intellect with such unassailable

But, granting the significance of Sir Thomas Dick-Lauder's facts, and
them, they will not bear examination in detail.
detritus as he assumed could have existed without leaving traces
  There is detritus enough in
  The two highest parallel
but no remnant of the barrier against which they abutted is to be
  It might be urged that the subsequent invasion of the valley by
in these valleys since the disappearance of the lakes.
Geikie has favoured me with a drawing of the Glen Spean 'road' near
  The road forms a shelf round a great
shelf, must have been cleared away.
account, you may, I think, with safety dismiss the detrital barrier as
Glen Roy.

in reality experience modified by scientific thought and pushed into
  At the time that he wrote, Sir Thomas
assigned for the blockage of these glens.
of ancient glaciers was the necessary antecedent to the new
distinguished writer just mentioned.
far beyond their present limits, was first made known by a Swiss
behind them, their former existence in places which they had long
  The subject of glacier extension was subsequently followed
 With
observations far beyond the domain of Switzerland.
country in 1840, and found in various places indubitable marks of
  England, Scotland, Wales, and Ireland he
  He visited Glen Roy,
consequence of his investigation, the barriers which stopped the glens
  To Mr.
Jamieson, above all others, we are indebted for the thorough testing

And let me here say that Agassiz is only too likely to be misrated and
to grasp in their totality the motive powers invoked in scientific
  True he lacked mechanical precision, but he abounded
some sciences, and probably in some stages of all sciences, are
  To Agassiz was given, not the
strength of the delver who brings ore from the recesses of the mine.
That ore may contain its share of dross, but it also contains the
which his occupation would depart.

 Under
placed a Bunsen's lamp.
212°, and then begins to boil.
ceases, although heat continues to be poured by the lamp into the
  What becomes of that heat?  We know that it is consumed in the
  In the experiment here arranged, the
at a low temperature.
ice, the second vessel being plunged in a mixture cold enough to
  As a result of the process we obtain a mass of ice.
That ice has an origin very antithetical to its own character.
cold, it is the child of heat.
no steam, and if there were no steam there would be no ice.
cold of the mixture surrounding the second vessel would not produce
  The cold must have the proper material to work upon; and this
heat.

conversing with an illustrious philosopher regarding that glacial
  This
certain stage in the history of the solar system, the sun's radiation
solar chill.
theory.
space, and 'the temperature of space' is a familiar expression with
  It was considered probable by Poisson that our
different temperatures; and that, during its passage through one of

years ago, and I therefore thought it worth while to show how
  Suppose the temperature of our planet to be
other cause, say one hundred degrees.
chill would bring down as, snow nearly all the moisture of our
  But this would not produce a glacial epoch.
epoch would require the long-continued generation of the material from
  Mountain snow, the nutriment of
tropical ocean by the sun.
the process as our lamp in the experiment referred to a moment ago.
Nothing is easier than to calculate the exact amount of heat expended
  It would, as I have
chap.
]  raise a quantity of
heat, but to its point of fusion.
instead of being filled with ice, the valleys of the Alps were filled
it is the heat, and not the cold, that would arrest our attention and
  The process of glacier making is obviously
vapour, plays as essential a part as the cold of the mountains which
 [Footnote: In Lyell's excellent 'Principles of Geology,'
error of supposing that the glacial period must have been one of
'  The really strange error was the
necessary to the production of glaciers would be wanting.

roads of Glen Roy an interest in my eyes; and in 1867, with a view to
explored pretty thoroughly the roads of the principal glen.
the highest road to the col dividing Glen Roy from Glen Spey, and,
inspect some of the roads with a theodolite, and to satisfy myself
valley.
sometimes to more than twenty yards; but near the head of Glen Roy the
rock, the effect of the lapping of the water on the more friable
  My
years had dimmed the memory even of the portion which had been
  Hence my desire to see the roads once more
  The Easter holidays of
telegram from Roy Bridge informed me that the roads were snowed up.
Finding books and memories poor substitutes for the flavour of facts,

up, and started (not this time alone) for the North.
my wife and I found ourselves at Dalwhinnie, whence a drive of some


We might have found the hills covered with mist, which would have
successful working days among the hills.
ordnance map of the region, on the Saturday morning we went up the
hills to the west.
we bore northwards, struck the ridge above Glen Gluoy, came in view of
visible.
reaching the cola over which fell the waters of the lakes which formed
  One reason doubtless is that at their upper ends the lakes were
strength to act upon the mountain drift.
were land-locked in the higher portions and protected from the
produce but a feeble impression upon the mountain sides.
Gluoy we passed down Glen Turrit to Glen Roy, and through it
and honest work.

as far as they were visible.


examined the erratic blocks upon its sides, and the ridges and mounds
  The
 Jamieson upon this region, including the mouth of
  We entered Glen
Roy Bridge--the search, namely, for glacier polishings and markings.
We did not find them copious, but they are indubitable.

rock by the roadside, 1,000 yards east of the milestone marked
  Farther east other cases
one time filled by a great glacier.
of the mountains is perfectly conclusive on this point; and in no
of this than at the head of Glen Glaster.
all intensely glaciated.

and produced the parallel roads, were the mountains south and west of
  The monarch of these is Ben Nevis, 4,370 feet high.
position of Ben Nevis and his colleagues, in reference to the
importance.
Macgillicuddy Reeks in the south-west of Ireland.
are, and were, the first to encounter the south-western Atlantic
Killarney, is enormous.
charged with the heat set free by its precipitation, pursue their
process may be understood by comparing the rainfall at Cahirciveen
  As found by Dr.
to 21--fifty-nine inches annually at Cahirciveen to twenty-one at
  During the glacial epoch this vapour fell as snow, and
evidences of the most impressive character in the region of the
  I have referred in other places to the great glacier
possession of the lake-basins, and left its traces on every rock and
  They are all
  Not in Switzerland itself do we find clearer

What the Macgillicuddy Reeks did in Ireland, Ben Nevis and the
  We had an
  From the bridge
precipitation ceased near Loch Laggan, whence eastward the roads were
  Measured by the gauge, the rainfall Fort William is 86 inches,
  The difference between
of the Caledonian Canal.
as just stated, 86 inches, while Culloden, at its north-eastern end,
  To the researches of that able and accomplished
 Buchan, we are indebted for these and other data of

Adhering to the facts now presented to us, it is not difficult to
produced and the glens dammed by ice.
epoch began to invade the Scottish hills, the sun at the same time
raised and drifted on to these 'northern mountains were more and more
  This slid down the slopes, and from every
into that glen.
nutrition of the glaciers by the frozen material above, and their
  For a period supply exceeded
ever-increasing height, and abutting against the mountains to the
  But why, it may be asked, should the valleys
of it were receptacles of water?  The answer is to be found in the
Spean.
Atlantic winds, and not until they had been in part dried, and also
the hills north of the Glen.

noted.
mountains covered; had it been in the summer we should have found the
  But happily it was at a season when the aspect of the
powers as snow collectors.
of view, we were hardly able to detect a fleck of snow, while heavy
  Were the glacial epoch to
Spean to be filled with glaciers from the south, while the hills and
comparatively free from ice.
reinforced from the west, and as long as the supply was in excess of
glens increasing in height.
approximately equal, the height of the glacier barriers would remain
  Then, as milder weather set in, consumption would be in
consequence.
consumption would continue, retarding indefinitely the disappearance
glens.
forced to yield.
entered the glen sufficiently far to block up Glen Glaster, would
  Glen Glaster and its col being opened, the
that of the second parallel road, would follow as a consequence.
think this the most probable course of things, but it is also possible

connect itself with upper Glen Spean.
both glens, the level of which, as already explained, was determined
  The last to yield
and probably also from the mountains north and south of Loch Arkaig.
But it at length yielded, and the waters in the glens resumed the

For the removal of the ice barriers no cataclysm is to be invoked; the
phenomena.
gradually melting barrier, the surface of the imprisoned lake not
comparable to the parallel roads.
of melting due to atmospheric conditions or to the character of the
pseudo-terraces would be formed, which, to the perplexity of some

In presence then of the fact that the barriers which stopped these
Spean, have dissolved and left not a wreck behind; in presence of the
undoubtedly have been able to maintain themselves had they ever been
filled these valleys--that the whole region, as proved by Mr.
Jamieson, is filled with the traces of their action; the theory which
my opinion, a degree of probability on its side which amounts to a

Into the details of the terrace formation I do not enter.
 Darwin
 Jamieson on the one side, and Sir John Lubbock on the other,
  The terraces, no doubt, are due in part to the
the wavelets, and the rearrangement of the stirred detritus, along the
  The descent of matter must have
together now.
the roads is materially augmented by differences of vegetation.
grass upon the terraces is not always of the same character as that
the dark shrub from the roads greatly enhances their conspicuousness.

essential features of the problem and its solution.
Glen Roy are lateral valleys which open into Glen Spean.
suppose Glen Spean filled from v to w with ice of a uniform elevation
that glen.
lateral valleys, closing all their mouths.
mountains right and left of Glen Gluoy would pour their waters into
the height of the col at A, 1170 feet above the sea.
the water would flow into Glen Roy.
higher than 1150 feet, the height of the col at B, over which it would

The water halting at these levels for a sufficient time, would form
  This
high to dominate the cols at A and B; but when through change of
of these cols, the water would then begin to flow over the dam instead
  Let us suppose the wasting of the ice to continue
a common lake would then fill both these glens, the level of which
pour for an indefinite period into Glen Spean.
second Glen Roy road and the highest road of Glen Glaster would be
  The ice subsiding still further, a connection would
upper part of Glen Spean.
the level of which would be that of the col D, over which for an
  During this period
Glen Spean, would be formed.
from the lower part of Glen Spean the waters would flow down their

Fig.

the solution of the problem of the Parallel Roads of Glen Roy.
first of these was taken by Sir Thomas Dick-Lauder, the second was the
was the testing and verification of this conception by the very
 Jamieson.
connected with this discourse gives me greater pleasure than the
  They are marked
observation, and by reasoning power of a high and varied kind.
pages had been returned 'for press' when I learned that the relation
Atlantic had not escaped Mr.
  To him obviously the
Parallel Roads, has been a labour of love.

history of the Scottish hills,--brief, that is to say, in comparison
varied structure and appearances, our planet must have passed.
survey of such a field two things are specially worthy to be taken
reaction of expanding knowledge upon the intellectual organ itself.

capacity, the mind refuses to take in revealed facts.
the steady contemplation of these facts so strengthens and expands the
it eventually finds a home.
successive subsidence, and final disappearance of the glacial lakes of
just described, constructed under the supervision of my assistant, Mr.
John Cottrell.
over its col; Glen Roy and its three roads with their respective
all represented.
formed of plate glass, brought each successive lake and its
caused the streams to flow down the glens of the model as they flow
]
A map of the district, with the parallel roads shown in red, is

LITERATURE OF THE SUBJECT.

--A Tour in Scotland.
 iii.
 394.
MACCULLOCH.
  Geol.
 Trans.
vol.
 1817, p.

THOMAS LAUDER DICK (afterwards SIR THOMAS DICK-LAUDER, Bart.
Parallel Roads of Lochaber.
 Roy.
 Trans.
 ix.
p.

CHARLES DARWIN.
of the other parts of Lochaber in Scotland, with an attempt to prove
  Phil.
 1839, vol.
 p.

SIR CHARLES LYELL.
 Second edition, 1841.

--The Glacial Theory and its Recent Progress--Parallel
 Edin.
 Journal, 1842, vol.
 p.

DAVID MILNE (afterwards DAVID MILNE-HOME).
Lochaber; with Remarks on the Change of Relative Levels of Sea and
 Edin.
Roy.
 Trans.
 xvi.
 395.

--Ancient Sea Margins.

H.
 ROGERS.
 Royal Inst.
Proceedings, 1861, vol.
 p.

THOMAS F.
--On the Parallel Roads of Glen Roy, and their
  Quart.

 1863, vol.
 p.

SIR CHARLES LYELL.
  1863, p.

REV.
 B.
--On the Marine Origin of the Parallel Roads of Glen
 Quart.
 Geol.
 1865, vol.
 p.

SIR JOHN LUBBOCK.
 Quart.

 Soc.
 xxiv.
 83.

--Observations on the Parallel Roads of Glen Roy.
Quart.
 Geol.
 1868, vol.
 p.

JAMES NICOL.
 1869.
Geol.
 Journal, vol.
 p.

JAMES NICOL.
  1872.
Geol.
 Journal, vol.
 p.

MAJOR-GENERAL SIR HENRY JAMES, R.
--Notes on the Parallel Roads of
 4to.

********************
IX.

1864.

advanced, which may be respectively named the hypothesis of fracture
  The former assumes that the forces by
crust, and that the valleys of the Alps are the tracks of these
out by the action of ice and water, the mountains themselves being the
  I had heard the Via Mala
profound chasm thus named, and through which the Hinter-Rhein now
earth's crust.
myself upon the point in question.

entering it, the first impression certainly is that it must be a
  This conclusion in my case was modified as I advanced.
distance up the gorge I found upon the slopes to my right quantities
  Still further
found more rolled stones, associated with sand and gravel.
this mass of detritus, fortunately, a vertical cutting had been made,
  There was
alternating layers of sand and pebbles, but the river which now rushes
  At one period of the Via Mala's
  Other evidences
  From the parapet of the
river scooped and eroded.

along the bottom of the gorge, has been known almost to fill it during
which the sides of the chasm exhibit are due to those occasional
  In reply to this, it may be stated that even the existence of
were true, it would be an additional argument in favour of the cutting
  For if floods operating at rare intervals could
river's bed, must certainly be competent to excavate it.

them I did not note) had a fine view of a portion of the gorge.
river here runs at the bottom of a cleft of profound depth, but so
  That this cleft must be a
suffices to prove that it has been cut by the river.
bottom we have the unmistakable marks of erosion.
seen on looking downwards from a point near the bridge; but looking
equally convincing.

river.
mechanical; they are simply ground away or detached in sensible
  Water, however, in passing over limestone, charges itself
dissolved in the water; and the gorges cut by water in such rocks
 To
forms which peaks of this rock usually assume, and also the grottos
  A rock capable
has quitted it; and in the case of the Via Mala it is the polish of
which assure us that the chasm has been the work of the river.

Zillis, the Via Mala opens into a plain bounded by high terraces.
occurred to me the moment I saw it that the plain had been the bed of
immediately informed me that such was the tradition of the
  This man conversed with intelligence, and as I drew
river, but above the road, and inferred that the river must once have
evidence perfectly.
retreat of the great glaciers, a rocky barrier crossed the valley at

  Two
raising of its bed by the deposition of detritus, and the cutting of
  In process of time the cut deepened into the
channel through the plain which its waters once totally covered.

over the Julier Pass to Pontresina.
lake-beds between Tiefenkasten and the summit of the Julier.
all of the same type--a more or less broad and level valley-bottom,
drainage of the lake being the consequence.
sometimes dammed by barriers of rock, sometimes by the moraines of

An example of this latter kind occurs in the Rosegg valley, about
from Pontresina.
of the noblest dimensions; in the neighbourhood of London it might be
  That it is a moraine, the inspection of it from a
possessing an educated eye.
mound is exposed, it exhibits moraine-matter--detritus pulverised by
  It stretched quite across the
  But now the barrier is
right, and the remaining three-fourths to its left.
a more resisting character hold their ground as barriers to the

In the Val di Campo, for example, about three-quarters of an hour from
interrupt the course of a river and compel the water to fall over them
  They have in great part resisted its action since the
  Behind the
on a deep layer of mould.

  The
chasm which is spanned at one place by a stone bridge.
not of a character to preserve smooth polishing; but the larger

from a point a little distance from the bridge in the direction of the
  The hollowing out of the rock by the
 A few minutes' walk
usual indications of an ancient lake, and terraces of distinct water
  From this position indeed the genesis of the gorge is clearly
  After the retreat of the ancient glacier, a transverse
place.
steeply down to join at the bottom of the slope the stream which
  On this incline the water became a
depth.

a fissure, the 'washing out' of which resulted in the formation of the
  Now no examination of the bed of the river ever proved the
when charged with solid matter in suspension, can cut a channel
  Cases of deep cutting can be pointed out
floor of the river not exhibiting a trace of fissure.
this kind on a small scale occurs near the Bernina Gasthaus, about two
  A little way below the junction of the two
a channel cut by itself, and 20 or 30 feet in depth.
the river-bed is covered with rolled stones; at other places it is
  The abstract power of water, if
instances.
of a fissure, why assume the existence of such fissures in cases like
simple and impressive history written on the walls of those gorges by

Numerous cases might be pointed out, varying in magnitude, but all
having been cut through by rivers, narrow gorges being the
  One of the most famous examples of this kind is the
  Here the ridge called the
fissure.
resting on the sediment of an ancient lake.
case, one might with an apparent show of reason conclude that the
to have been; but when we find it to be a single sample of actions
same kind, though different in magnitude, can be pointed out--it seems
earthquake was at hand to form a channel for the river.
of the barrier at Pontresina, the Kirchet, after the retreat of the
on the bed of which now stands the village of Imhof.
barrier the Aar tumbled towards Meyringen, cutting, as the centuries
drain the lake, leaving in its place the alluvial plain, through which

In 1866 I subjected the Finsteraarschlucht to a close examination.
earthquake theory already adverted to was then prevalent regarding it,

to visit the Aarenschlucht, a narrow lateral gorge which runs down to
  The aspect of this smaller
former ages been there at work.
so as to render palpable to the most careless eye that it is a gorge
  But it was regarding the sides of the great chasm that
be seen.
was reached which commanded an excellent view of both sides of the
  The water was cutting cold, but I was repaid.
left-hand side was a jutting cliff which bore the thrust of the river
  From top to
  There was no
  The river which now runs so deeply down had once been
  It has been the delver of its own channel through the barrier

But the broad view taken by the advocates of the fracture theory is,
produced by the upheaval of the land, the cracks across the barriers
the valleys.
theory of erosion as applied to the valleys of the Alps.
gorges, often not more than twenty or thirty feet across, sometimes
  Such
to the real erosive agents which scooped the valley out; but the
to such cracks than the motion of a railway train could be ascribed to

These deep gorges occur, I believe, for the most part in limestone
on limestone are quite astonishing.
of considerable depth produced by small streams the beds of which are
  Right and left of the larger
  The idea of time must,
phenomena.
left behind them, and which refer, geologically considered, to actions
effected in geologic periods.
throws light upon the whole.
Albula, there is also a little Via Mala, which is not less significant
  The river flows here through a profound limestone
erosion.
limestone rock that I have ever seen is the gorge at Pfaeffers.
the traveller passes along the side of the chasm midway between top
  Whichever way he looks, backwards or forwards, upwards or
the irresistible and impressive evidence that this wonderful fissure

I have thus far confined myself to the consideration of the gorges
cross the valleys of the Alps; as far as they have been examined by me
  But the larger question still remains,
themselves?  This question includes that of the formation of the
disappear.
not beset with more or less of difficulty.
be found which would seem to contradict every solution which, refers

Still the Alps present features of a character sufficiently definite
reasoning.
will not be disputed; for they are in great part composed of
  Their present
shape of the earth which have been of frequent occurrence throughout
causing the sea-bottom to protrude beyond its surface.
the inelastic character of its materials, the protuberance of the Alps
and this conclusion gains in probability when we consider the
many parts of the Alps.
were once horizontal could not have been effected without dislocation.
Fissures would be produced by these changes; and such fissures, the
valleys of the Alps.

reason on our present subject without the power of presenting mentally
which produced its upheaval.
checked by reason and by observation.
I think, be doubted, but that the valleys of the Alps are thus formed

advocates of the fissure theory suppose the forces to have
local elevation of distinct ridges; or whether they assume local
upon the general upheaval minor and local upheavals.

to be general--that a swelling out of the earth's crust occurred here,
three miles above the sea-level.
circular portion of the crust, say one hundred miles in diameter, and
circle to remain fixed, and that the elevation was confined to the
  The upheaval would throw the crust into a state of
fracture.
 Let us now
bear to the area of the unfissured crust.
that is here required; for the problem is of such a character as to

No one, I think, would affirm that the area of the fissures would be
  For let us consider the strain
point on its rim to a point opposite.
spherical swelling, the length of the arc corresponding to a chord of
24 miles; consequently
24 of a mile, or
  A fissure or a number of cracks with this total width
the cracks over the length of 100 miles would be 420 yards.
instead of comparing the width of the fissures with the length of the
unfissured land, we should of course find the proportion much less.
These considerations will help the imagination to realise what a small

fissures to be one-tenth of the area of the land would be quite
than one-half that of the land would be in a proportionate degree
  If we suppose the elevation to be due to the shrinking
equally at the conclusion that the area of the open fissures would be
crust.

needless to say that the Alps themselves bear no sort of resemblance
  Instead of deep
peaks, and gradually sloping to form valleys.
crust, we have a state of things closely resembling the surface of the
  The valleys, instead of being much
  A plaster cast of
depressions, would exhibit blunter and broader mountains, with
  The valleys
fissures.
this is unproved, and, were it proved, the fissures would still play
regarded as the real sculptors of the Alps.

due to the operation of a force acting throughout the entire region,
of the country.
local disturbances, the manipulation of the earth's crust necessary to
difficulties of the theory into very strong relief.
examination of the region from many of the more accessible
Monte Confinale--or, better still, from Mont Blanc, Monte Rosa, the
local peculiarities are toned down, and the operations of the powers
prominence--must, I imagine, convince every physical geologist of the
conformation of the Alps.

scale, produces the same effect upon the mind as the prospect from one
  We are apt to be influenced by local phenomena
conformation, are, with reference to our customary standards, vast and
  In a true model those local peculiarities disappear; for
essential facts and forms are presented to the undistracted attention.

the general aspect of the Alps fixes in the mind.
example, numerous valleys which the most ardent plutonist would not
  That such is
Chines in the Isle of Wight.
erosion--commencing, if necessary, with the small ravines which run
their bottoms--we can proceed, by almost insensible gradations, to the
upon the point at which fracture begins to play a material part.

and where the eminences are gentle on either side.
mountains become higher and more abrupt as we ascend, and at length we
  Continuing
finally emerge from the valley and reach the summit of an open col, or
  This is the common character of
  Crossing the col, we descend along the opposite
reverse order.
by fissures, what prevents the fissure from prolonging itself across
acquainted with a single instance in the Alps where the chain has been
  The cols are simply depressions; in

The typical instance just sketched follows as a natural consequence
  Before either ice or water can exert

not fully developed; but lower down tributaries unite, erosion is
a maximum.
more gentle; the cutting power gradually relaxes, until finally the
which it produced in the earlier portions of its course entirely

I have hitherto confined myself to the consideration of the broad
and all that I have been able to observe and think with reference to
  Under the term erosion I
frost and rain.
which of these two has produced the greatest effect it is perhaps
  Two years ago I wrote a brief note 'On the
 Mag.
 xxiv.
 169]
  The facts on
the conclusion then announced fairly follows from the facts is, I

The arguments which have been thus far urged against the conclusion
  Indeed, the idea of glacier erosion appears so
refutation.
position was taken up by many excellent workers when the question of
  The idea was considered
sought to be explained by reference to almost any process rather than
  Let those who so wisely took the side of 'boldness' in
the question of glacier erosion, in the position formerly occupied by

Looking at the little glaciers of the present day--mere pigmies as
one of them issues a river more or less voluminous, charged with the
  Where the rocks are
water is very great.
from Santa Catarina to Bormio is thick with it.
with this matter, and by it has so silted up the Lake of Constance as
  The Rhone is
formed by the silt above the Lake of Geneva.

exerting a crushing force on every point of its bed which bears its
from the rock to which it belongs; while the water which everywhere
away and leaves the rock clean for further abrasion.
action of glaciers to the simple rubbing away of the rocks, and
but a physical certainty, that they will scoop out valleys.
glacier does more than abrade.
intersected by joints and places of weakness, which divide them into
  A glacier is undoubtedly competent to root
  Indeed the mere _à priori_ consideration of

ones were probably three times this depth), and allowing 40 feet of
such a glacier presses with a weight of 375 lbs, and on every square
 With a vertical pressure
from behind.
excavation.

proving its impotence as an erosive agent; but this very retardation
energy.
itself.
moving glacier exercises against its bed-from the fact that the
upper layers of a glacier move bodily over the lower ones--a portion
of the glacier down its valley.

regarded as conclusive evidence against the theory of erosion.
it has been asked, I did not the glacier of the Rhone go straight
crack, why did the crack make this bend?  The crack, I submit, had at
glacier had.
another matter is perfectly applicable here: 'A crack once produced
limit, at the point at which it has just arrived, the divellent force
cohesive force which acted when there was no crack, viz.
of the uncracked portion alone' ('Proc.
  Soc.
 xii.
p.
  To account, then, for the bend, the adherent of the fracture
crack at right angles to itself; and he surely will permit the

The influence of small accidents on the direction of rivers is
either straight or sinuous channels by causes apparently of the most
  In his interesting paper 'On the Lakes of
 Studer also refers to the bend of the Rhine at
fissure.
it was plain that M.
spot, I was unable to arrive at his conclusion as to the necessity of

Again, in the interesting volume recently published by the Swiss
 Desor informs us that the Swiss naturalists who met
there convinced themselves that a glacier had no tendency whatever to
  I scarcely think that the question of
disposed of so easily.
Morteratsch glacier.

to congratulate myself on the aid of my friend Mr.
did such good service upon the Mer de Glace and its tributaries.
set out three lines across the Morteratsch glacier, one of which
while the two others were staked out, the one above the hut and the
  Calling the highest line A, the line which crossed
mean hourly motions of the three lines, deduced from observations
  On each line eleven stakes were
  in the

Morteratsch Glacier, Line A.

 of Stake.

1                 0.

2                 0.

3                 0.

4                 0.

5                 0.

6                 0.

7                 0.

8                 0.

9                 0.

10                0.

11                0.

As in all other measurements of this kind, the retarding influence of
greatest velocity.


No.
    Hourly Motion.

05 inch.

14 inch.

24 inch.

32 inch.


6                 0.

7                 0.

8                 0.

9                 0.

10                0.

11                0.

The first stake of this line was quite close to the edge of the

to render the retardation of the further side of the glacier fully

Morteratsch Glacier, Line C.

  of Stake     Hourly Motion.

05 inch.

09 inch.

18 inch.

20 inch.

25 inch.

27 inch.

27 inch.

30 inch.

21 inch.

20 inch.

16 inch.

velocity diminishes as we descend the glacier.
maximum motion of three lines respectively is as follows:
Maximum Motion in 100 hours.



Line C            30 inches.

observer who looks upon the Morteratsch from the Piz Languard, or from
  A medial moraine runs along the glacier,
extending in width, until finally it quite covers the terminal portion
  The cause of this is revealed by the foregoing
crossed by the line A approaches a second stone on the moraine where
one hundred hours.
compression.
they must consequently move laterally and render the moraine at the

The motion of the Morteratsch glacier, then, diminishes as we descend.
The maximum motion of the third line is thirty inches in one hundred
line nearer to the end of the glacier, the motion would have been
  At the end itself it is nearly insensible.
The snout of the Aletsch Glacier has a diurnal motion of less than two
inches.
]  Now
a glacier.
of a glacier that must act the part of ploughshare; and it is
  The scooping power will exert itself
 A glacier's snout
higher up.
end of a glacier does or does not accomplish can decide this question.

can fairly abut; and this power, notwithstanding the slowness of the
  A

removed by the thrust of the ice.
overturned; and in a few years, if the glacier continues its reputed

The question of Alpine conformation stands, I think, thus: We have,
Rhone, which we might conveniently call valleys of the first order.
The mountains which flank these main valleys are also cut by lateral
the second order.
found running into them, which may be called valleys of the third
  Smaller ravines and depressions, again, join the latter, which
streaks and cuttings so minute as not to merit the name of valleys at
  At the bottom of every valley we have a stream, diminishing in
carrying its materials to lower levels.
valleys have been filled for untold ages by glaciers of enormous
over which they passed.
of the mountains, and in enormous quantities, the very matter derived

The plains of Italy and Switzerland are cumbered by the _débris_ of the
  The lower, wider, and more level valleys are also filled to
  In
higher valleys we have also suggestions as to the magnitude of the
  This moraine-matter, moreover, can
the ancient glacier; it is in great part derived from the grinding and
  This accounts for the
when almost all the mountains were covered with ice and snow, and
naked crests cannot have been considerable.

agencies here briefly referred to.
causes.
diminished strength; and if they are granted sufficient time, it is
to them.
no possible application of this theory, pure and simple, can we obtain
  Erosion must in the long run
  The fracture theory
and this is a probable inference.
sufficient to produce the conformation of the Alps, and that they
the country, are assumptions which do not appear to me to be justified

There is a grandeur in the secular integration of small effects
the idea of a cataclysm.
consumed in the execution of this colossal sculpture.
may, of course, be pushed further.
earth required for its consolidation.
sublimity through our inability to grasp them.
they fail to make a solemn impression.
comes more within the scope of the intellect, and the majesty of the
  In the
in the plunge of a cataract, we often see more impressive
stars.
necessary to the building up of the conception, the expansion of the

*****
I will here record a few other measurements executed on the Rosegg
junction of the Rosegg proper with the Tschierva glacier, a short

Rosegg Glacier.

  of Stake.

1                 0.

2                 0.

07
4                 0.

11
6                 0.

14
8                 0.

24
10                0.

24
This is an extremely slowly moving glacier; the maximum motion hardly
  Crevasses prevented us from continuing

********************
X.

[Footnote: A discourse delivered in the Royal Institution, March 22,
]
The care of its sailors is one of the first duties of a maritime
the coast at night.
by beacon-fires placed sometimes on natural eminences and sometimes on
  Close to Dover Castle, for

As our marine increased greater skill was invoked, and lamps

intensify the light, which at a little distance appeared as if it
  This 'catoptric' form of apparatus is
long time past it has been more and more displaced by the great lenses

In a first-class 'dioptric' apparatus the light emanates from a lamp
very active draught, attains to great intensity.
lenses refract the rays issuing from the lamp so as to cause them to
  In revolving
the spokes of a wheel, which sweep over the sea and strike the eye of

It is not for clear weather that the greatest strengthening of the
  Nor is it for densely
  But it is for the
powerful light can assert itself, while a feeble one is extinguished.
The usual first-order lamp is one of four wicks, but Mr.
able and indefatigable engineer of the Trinity House, has recently
flame.
 Wigham, of Dublin, we are indebted for the successful
  In some lighthouses
Galley Head three burners of the largest size can be employed, the
  These larger powers are invoked
clear weather.
from the large burner to the small, is made with ease, rapidity, and
  This employment of gas is indigenous to Ireland, and the
facility to Mr.

The last great agent employed in lighthouse illumination is
  It was in this Institution, beginning in 1831, that
currents which in our day have received such astounding development.
In relation to this subject Faraday's words have a prophetic ring.
have rather,' he writes in 1831, 'been desirous of discovering new
of exalting the force of those already obtained, being assured that
'  The labours
constitute a brilliant fulfilment of this prediction.

made was independently taken a few years ago by Dr.
Sir Charles Wheatstone.
machine endowed with an infinitesimal charge of magnetism may, by a
itself magnetically as to cast by its performance all the older
  The light now before you is that of a small

steam-engine that 'works it, our members are indebted to the
 William Siemens, who in the most generous manner has
  After an exhaustive trial
far greater power than this one, have been recently chosen by the
Lizard Point.

gas-light, and the electric light, being intended to aid the mariner

  The sun cannot
  Hence
  Bells, gongs,
it is mainly, if not wholly, with explosive signals that we have now
  The gun has been employed with useful effect at the North
and at other points on our coasts.
venture to think memorable series of observations conducted under the
Foreland in 1872 and 1873, it was proved that a short 5.
howitzer, firing 3 lbs.
18-pounder firing the same charge.
the Elder Brethren.
shape of the gun, and as it could not be assumed that in the howitzer
were made with the War Office for the construction of a gun specially
of 3 lbs.
  To prevent the unnecessary landward waste of the
project the sound over the sea, where it was most needed.
construction of this gun was based on a searching series of
muzzles of various kinds.
 309).
It was constructed on the principle of the revolver, its various
position.
principles on which its construction was based.

Woolwich experiments.
artillerists, that a bronze gun produces a specially loud report.
doubted from the outset whether this would help us; and in a letter
report of a gun, as affecting an observer close at hand, is made up of
expanding gas, and the sound derived from the vibrations of the gun,
  This latter, I apprehend,
'
FIG.
 Breech-loading Fog-signal Gun, with Bell Mouth, proposed by
A.
 [Footnote: The carriage
made.

'that the sonorous qualities of bronze are greatly superior to those
baser metal at long ranges.
true cause for this difference.
so much energy withdrawn from the explosive force of the gunpowder.
Further experiments would, however, be needed to place the superiority
]
Coincident with these trials of guns at Woolwich, gun-cotton was
  From the first,
persistently on this substance; for the remarkable experiments of Mr.
Abel, whereby its rapidity of combustion and violently explosive
eminently calculated to fulfil the conditions necessary to the
  What those conditions are we
very remarkable paper, published by Professor Stokes in the

The explosive force of gunpowder is known to depend on the sudden
  Now the work
displacement of the projectile, besides which it has to displace the
of the atmosphere.
gunpowder to perform.
mere mechanical translation of either shot or air, but into vibratory
  We want _pulses_ to be formed which shall propagate themselves
choice and management of the explosive material.

rarefaction.
imparted to it lack due promptness, the wave is not produced.
the case of a common clock pendulum, which oscillates to and fro, and

it might be supposed to be condensed, while a partial vacuum might be
  As a matter of fact, we have nothing of
  The air particles in front of the bob retreat so rapidly,
formed.
that of air, a prompter action is essential to the formation of
  It is to this rapid power of
crowded together or to be drawn apart, that Professor Stokes, with
Sir John Leslie, of hydrogen upon sound.

struck gently on a pad and held in free air, emits a scarcely audible
  It behaves to some extent like the pendulum bob just referred
  This feebleness is due to the prompt 'reciprocating flow' of the
formation of sound-pulses is forestalled.
us that this flow may be intercepted by placing the edge of a card in
  An immediate

The more rapid the shock imparted to the air, the greater is the

rapidity of combustion, it may be expected that they will also vary as
  This theoretic inference is completely verified
  In a series of preliminary trials conducted at
different kinds of powder were determined.
of their grains they bear the names respectively of Fine-grain
G.
G.
L.
), and
) (See annexed figures.
amounted to 4.
 four 24-lb.
respective charges.

  9.

dissentient, pronounced the sound of the fine-grain powder loudest of
  In the opinion of seven of the eleven the large-grain powder
on the list; while they were again unanimous in pronouncing the
  These differences are
  All who
surprised at the mildness of its thunder.
resulting from quick combustion, the powder employed is composed of
 In
themselves into gas, which on issuing from muzzle imparts a kind of
condensation of an intensely sonorous wave.

as a promising fog-signal.
Mr.
  In its
presumed, be able to slip from condensation to rarefaction with a
  On _à
gun-cotton, while in a great number of comparative experiments,
verified in the most conclusive manner.

the use of it, the resources of Woolwich Arsenal have been freely
  General Campbell,
officers, have taken an active personal part in the investigation, and
the observations.
for gunpowder, while gun-cotton has been fired in free air and in the

On the 22nd of February, 1875, a number of small guns, cast specially
parabolic muzzles--firing 4 oz.
against 4 oz.
focus of a parabolic reflector.
weight the reflector is of moderate size, and may be employed without
]
The sound produced by the gun-cotton, reinforced by the reflector, was
  With equal unanimity, the

among themselves, but none of them came up to the gun-cotton, either
  A second series, observed from a
foregoing result.

gunpowder has to be taken into account, though considerations of cost
human life.
price were pitted against each other, the results were somewhat
  Indeed, the perfect manipulation of the gun-cotton
effectiveness of firing, augmenting as experience increased.

 of gunpowder, these quantities
  The guns employed to
  brass howitzer, a 24-lb.
cast-iron howitzer, and the long 18-pounder employed at the South
  The result was, that the 24-lb.
 of
  of gun-cotton detonated
  howitzer and the 18-pounder were both
  On the end of May, on the other hand, the

Meanwhile, the parabolic-muzzle gun, expressly intended for
1876, its power was tested at Shoeburyness.
16-pounder, a 5.
5 lb.
the focus of a reflector (see annexed figure), and 1.
 of
  On this occasion nineteen different
a 3-lb.
employed to fire the same charge.
of the gun-cotton fired in the open, and the gunpowder fired from the
  Fired in the
other sound-producers.
explosion, but it did good service afterwards.

  10.

5 lb.
Reflector.

angle of about 70°, of which 50' lay on the one side and 20° on the
  The shots were heard by eleven
2 miles to 13.
  In all these
parabolic muzzle of the gun, came into play.
the sound in one direction implies its withdrawal from some other
25
of 90° with the line of fire, the gun-cotton in the open beat the new
5 miles and 13.
miles respectively, the gun-cotton in the open beat both the gun and
  This result is rendered more
distance of 13.
time.

which are not of uniform intensity throughout.
in the direction of its axis.
  A bell,
are far denser in the horizontal plane passing through the bell than
  The oldest bellbangers
its mouth, emitted the strongest sound, their practice being probably
  Our slabs of gun-cotton also emit waves
  It has occurred in the
turned towards the suspending wire of a second slab six feet distant,
turned to the wire this never occurred.

probably to be ascribed the remarkable fact observed on March 23, that
gun-cotton detonated in the open had a slight advantage over the new

Theoretic considerations rendered it probable that the shape and size
sound.
shape, and accordingly proposed cutting a large slab into fragments of
between the sounds were by no means so great as the differences in the
  The mean
at distances varying from 1.
8 miles, were as follows:
Weights          4 oz.
  9 oz.

Value of sound   3.
34   4.
03
These charges were cut from a slab of dry gun-cotton about 1.
thick: they were squares and rectangles of the following dimensions:
4 oz,           2 inches by 2 inches;
6 oz,           2 inches by 3 inches;
9 oz,           3 inches by 3 inches;
12 oz,          2 inches by 6 inches.

the sounds.
the approximate relative intensity of the sounds as estimated by the
  When we find a 9-oz.
 charge marked
03, the two sounds may be regarded as practically equal in
  in the
  Were the
values of the sounds at the distances recorded would not, in my
that indicated by the foregoing numbers.
rendered still more certain the effectiveness, as well as the economy,

It is an obvious corollary from the foregoing experiments that on our
a considerable distance by the sea--where, therefore, the sound has to
gun, or of the parabolic reflector, might be a disadvantage rather
  Here guncotton, exploded in the open, forms the
  This remark is especially
round them as from central foci.

nor gun could be mounted; and as a handy fleet-signal, dispensing with
invaluable.
local damage may be done by the explosion.
lighthouse might suffer from concussion near at hand, and though
lighthouse and of the ship's deck, to place the firing-point of the
regards simplicity and effectiveness, with the expedient of a
  Had such a means of signalling existed at the
warned of her approach to danger ten, or it may be twenty, miles
  Had the fleet
whistle, the 'Iron Duke' and 'Vanguard' need never have come into

It was the necessity of providing a suitable signal for rock
that suggested the idea of the gun-cotton rocket to Sir Richard
  His idea was to place
ascensional force of which should be employed to carry the disk to an
associated with a detonator, the gun-cotton should be fired, sending
and sea.
1876, at the firework manufactory of the Messrs.

 and four
5 oz.
  They ascended to a great height, and
  On July 27, the rockets

The most noteworthy result on this occasion was the hearing of the
5 miles E.
Lighthouse, 8.
  by N; that is to say, at opposite sides of
  It is worthy of remark that, in the case of the
and the place of observation.
remarked at the time, 'may prove to be a valuable consideration if it
whence the sea could not be freely observed.
such obstacles was one of the objects which the inventor of the rocket

With reference to the action of the wind, it was thought desirable to
with others produced at the elevation attainable by the gun-cotton
  Wind and weather, however, are not at our command; and hence
13, 1876, was not fulfilled.
this day, with smooth water and a calm atmosphere, the rockets were
2 miles from the firing-point.
The quantity of gun-cotton employed was 7.
 On Thursday, March 8,
elevations were pushed still further.
consisted of 0.
 disks, suspended from a horizontal iron bar about
5 feet above the ground.

and the height to which they attained, as determined by a theodolite,
  The day was cold, with occasional squalls
that of the wind.
'Vestal,' at distances varying from 3 to 6 miles.
the explosions in the air exceeded that of the explosions near the
  At Windmill Hill, Gravesend,
5 miles from the
the ground was loudest; while in the remaining five the rocket had the

Towards the close of the day the atmosphere became very serene.
distant cumuli sailed near the horizon, but the zenith and a vast
  From the
elevation, and exploded with a loud report.
nucleus of sound was a continuous train of echoes, which retreated to
seven seconds' duration.
those so frequently noticed at the South Foreland in 1872-73, and
'
On the 23rd of March the experiments were resumed, the most noteworthy
Tillingham, 10 miles to the N.
; at West Mersea, 15.
N.
 by E; at Brightlingsea, 17.
E.
Wash, 20.
E.
 The wind was blowing at the
E.
some by a 24-lb.

In December, 1876, Mr.
Cotton-powder Company, had proposed a trial of this material against
  The density of the cotton he urged was only 1.
while that of the powder was 1.
  A greater quantity of explosive
 Gardiner

 Mackie, who had previously gone very
the cotton-powder manufactory, on the banks of the Swale, near
  The weights of cotton-powder
of signals fired a few feet above the ground.
throughout were arranged and conducted by Mr.
  Our desire on
Swale and other obstacles limited our distance to 1.
  We stood
S.
 from the firing-point while the wind blew fresh from the
E.

  The rockets in
fired near the ground.
proportional to the quantity of the material exploded, 8 oz.
very nearly as loud a report as 1 lb.
invariably followed the explosion of the rockets, were loud and

On the 17th of October, 1877, another series of experiments with
  The charge of
 of L.
 powder.
were 12 oz, 8 oz, 4 oz, and 2 oz.
  The gun
during the afternoon of the 17th.
'Vestal' and the 'Galatea,' positions being successively assumed which
wind, and across the wind.
3 to 7 miles, that of the 'Vestal,' which was more restricted in her
  Briefly summed up, the result is that
  charge, which it will be remembered was
 rocket,
 rocket, and by the 4-oz.
 The 2-oz.
fell behind the howitzer.

were heard on the day now referred to:
1.
5 miles W.
W.

2.
E.
    5 out of 40 sounds heard.
    Light-vessel
3.
E.
   18 out of 40 sounds heard.

  St.
E.

5.
E.
    19 out of 40 sounds heard.

  Westgate     23 miles S.
 by E.

7.
E.
    8 out of 40 sounds heard.

wind about N.
 by N.
6 or 7 and sometimes dropping to a force of 2 or 3.
Leigh excepted, all these places were to leeward of Shoeburyness.
four other stations to leeward, varying in distance from 15.
5
varying from 8 to 26 miles, the sounds were also inaudible.
found, indeed, that the sounds proceeding directly against the wind

On the following day, viz.
with the view of making a series of strict comparative experiments
  Rockets containing 8 oz, 4 oz, and
 of gun-cotton had been prepared at the Royal Arsenal; while
supplied by the Cotton-powder Company at Faversham.
compared the ordinary 18-pounder gun, which happened to be mounted at
 of powder, and a syren.

cotton-powder were practically equal as producers of sound.

manner, only a single unit separating the numerical value of the 8-oz.
rocket from that of the 2-oz.
  The former was recorded as 6.
and the latter as 5.
 rocket being
  These results were recorded by a number of
' They were completely
of the 8-oz rocket 6-1, and that of the 2-oz.
2.
18-pounder gun fell far behind all the rockets, a result, possibly, to
  The
that of the rocket.
lbs.
beginning with 40 lbs.
 pressure.
was pointed to windward, and in the axis of the instrument the sound
 rocket.
direction at right angles to the axis, and still more in the rear of


These are the principal comparative trials made between the gun-cotton
  On the
Island with the following results.
firing-point, with land intervening, the 18-pounder, firing a 3-lb.
charge, was quite unheard.
 rocket and the 8-oz.
rocket, however, reached an elevation which commanded the acoustic
  When both were in view the rockets
  On the 6th of August, at St.
the 4-oz.
 rockets proved superior to the syren.
Shambles Light-vessel, when a pressure of 13 lbs.
sound the syren, the rockets proved greatly superior to that
  Proceeding along the sea margin at Flamboro' Head, Mr.
Edwards states that at a distance of 1.
previously used as a fog-signal hidden behind the cliffs, its report
 rocket, rising to an elevation
face of an opposing wind.

experiments were made by Mr.
gun-cotton rocket.
me I extract the following particulars.
annexed statement contains the name of the place of observation, the
observed:
Stoke Hill, Ipswich  10 miles Rockets clearly seen and sounds

Melton               15 miles Signals distinctly heard.
                              first that sounds were reverberated

Framlingham          18 miles Signals very distinctly heard, both in


Stratford.
 Andrews Reports loud; startled

Tuddenham.
 Martin Reports very loud; rolled

Christ Church Park.
                              minute after flash.

                              house.

Bildestone            6 miles Explosion very loud, wind against sound.

                              inhabitants for claps of thunder.

                              atmosphere; a rumbling detonation heard.

                              observer's house.

Lawford              15.
                                distant thunder.

enclosed a large angle with the direction of the wind.
indeed, the two directions were at right angles to each other.
needless to dwell for a moment on the advantage of possessing a signal

The explosion of substances in the air, after having been carried to a
  In
as a signal of distress, which proposal was subsequently realized, but
  The idea of
due to Sir Richard Collinson, the Deputy Master of the Trinity House.
Thanks to the skilful aid given by the authorities of Woolwich, by Mr.
Prentice, and Mr.
signal of great power, handiness, and economy, being thus placed at
  Not only may the rocket be applied in
may be turned to important account.
'Vanguard' I ventured to urge upon an eminent naval officer the

finding room for signal guns.
surmounts this difficulty, It is manipulated with ease and rapidity,
important extension to the voice of the admiral in command.
needless to add that at any point upon our coasts, or upon any other
station might be extemporised without difficulty.


accompanied the explosion of gun-cotton in free air, speaking of them
time in my Report on Fog-signals, addressed to the Corporation of
 [Footnote: See also 'Philosophical
 183.
fundamental significance.
from which they could come.
air and hardly a ripple on the sea, they reached a magical intensity.
As far as the sense of hearing could judge, they came from the body of
  The
blast had ceased the echoes struck in, adding their strength to the
  After the blast had ended the echoes
observation, and finally dying away at great distances.
were perfectly continuous as long as the sea was clear of ships,
  But
the echo from the broadside of the vessel was returned as a shock
music.

sea-waves.
echoes were produced in great intensity and duration when no waves
  It has been
waves, real or assumed, but on the direction of the axis of the
  Causing that axis to traverse an arc of 210°, and the
at all events in calm weather, returned from that portion of the
  They could not,
variation of direction and their perfectly continuous fall into
objects on the land.
into which the trumpet poured its maximum sound, and fell in intensity

The day on which our latest observations were made was particularly
  Before reaching Dungeness, the smoothness of the sea and the
atmosphere.
and the land.
foreseen.
  The rocket being sent up, it exploded at a
less and less intense as the distances of the invisible surfaces of
  About five seconds after the
the vessel lying between us and the land.
this more intense echo the aerial reverberation continued its retreat,
 [Footnote:
of the 12-oz.

]
I have referred to the firing of an 8-oz.
'Galatea' on March 8, 1877, stating the duration of its echoes to be
  Mr.
that in his experiments similar echoes had been frequently heard of
  The ranges of his sounds alone would

To attempt to interpret an experiment which I have not had an
without a consciousness of this that I refer here to a result
notion of aerial echoes.
a syren towards the zenith, and found that when the syren was sounded
  Now the reflecting surfaces which give rise to
between sea and air.
we have descending streams--if the air below be warmed, we have
  A
upon the reflecting surfaces, as does a sound proceeding horizontally
  Aerial echoes, therefore, will not accompany the
  The experiment,
I have ventured to enunciate.
see but to vary such an experiment is a necessary prelude to grasping

In a paper published in the 'Philosophical Transactions' for 1876,
terms Without attempting to explain the reverberations and echoes
that in no case have I heard any attending the reports of the rockets,
 of gunpowder, which has been found by
 Fraser to require an iron case to produce an effective
]  although they seem to have been invariable with the guns
  These facts suggest that the echoes are in some way
  They are caused by
sound; but I am not aware that they have ever been observed in the
' The
think that, in speaking of echoes, Professor Osborne Reynolds and
  Be that as it may, the
as to direction here laid down is not necessary to the production of

There is not a feature connected with the aerial echoes which cannot
  I have
 331),
number would suffice and only eleven are shown in the figure), each
  In this way
  A sounding reed a fixed
'sensitive flame,' [Footnote: Fully described in my 'Lectures on
 227.
end.
agitated, and roared boisterously.
it as it issued from the slits, the air above the flames became so
from a height of 6 inches to a height of 18 inches.
acoustic opacity of the air in front of the South Foreland strikingly
 [Footnote: Lectures on Sound, 3rd ed, p.
]  Turning off
the reed, it burned there tranquilly, though the reed was sounding.
Again lighting the gas as it issued from the brass tubes, the sound
violent agitation.
standing behind the syren-trumpet at the South Foreland.
experiment is extremely simple, and in the highest degree impressive.

  11.


suitable for the production of sound.
Dewar, Mr.
dynamite, with extremely promising results.
delivery of the foregoing lecture I was informed that Mr.
proposed the employment of dynamite in the Collinson rocket.



********************
XI.

[Footnote: From a lecture delivered in the Royal Institution of Great
]
I HOLD in my hand an uncorrected proof of the syllabus of this course
'On the Importance of the Study of Physics as a Means of Education.
The corrected proof, however, contains the title: 'On the Importance
' Small as this
distinct modes of viewing the subject before us.
is sometimes applied to a single faculty or organ, and if we know
to clearer notions regarding the education of the sum of all the
  When, for example, we speak of the
at the top of the windpipe which throw into vibration the air forced
  These
is found that they can be so modified by exercise as to produce notes
  This exercise we call the
  We may choose for our exercise songs new or
aimed at, the songs may be regarded as the means by which this
  I think this expresses the state of the
education.
improvement and development of the mental faculties, I shall consider

culture, and this is my deliberate design.

that portion of natural science which lies midway between astronomy
  The former, indeed, is Physics applied to 'masses of
molecules.
lie nearest to human perception: light and heat, colour, sound,
and lightning, rain, snow, dew, and so forth.
between these phenomena and the reasoning mind.
but are not satisfied with the mere act of observation: the fact must
effect.
of thought: look at them, compare them, observe their mutual relations
finally alight upon the cause which unites them.
of the mind, in this centripetal direction--in its progress from the
  But,
  We set out from
  If the guess be true,
testimony of experiment whether the thing is so.
of thought completed,--from without inward, from multiplicity to
  In thus
reasoning powers are called into play.
these processes may be compared to those exercises of the body which
whole frame the benefits of healthy action.

suction-pump is but an imitation of the first act of every new-born
  Nor do I think it calculated to lessen that infant's
shows him that the atmosphere was his helper in extracting the first
 The child grows, but is still an
respect distance.
mechanical tact to lay hold of a spoon.
into his mouth, hurts his gums, and thus learns the impenetrability of
  He lets the spoon fall, and jumps with delight to hear it
  The experiment made by accident is repeated
upon sound and gravitation.
in the path of the enquirer: he is sure to go wrong, and Nature is
  He falls downstairs, burns
the conditions of his physical well being.
proceeding, and it is wonderful what progress her pupil makes.
enjoyments for a time are physical, and the confectioner's shop
finer life are already beginning to unfold themselves, and the
  He begins to see
one that has gone before, and will be succeeded by another.
becomes a puzzle to himself; and to satisfy his newly-awakened
  The needs and
yearnings of the child.
character and causes of the phenomena presented to his observation;
having it repressed, unless the attractions of natural phenomena be
purpose of exercising our self-denial in letting them alone; we may
to an impulse implanted by nature in the constitution of man.

therefore the recipient of a modern education, stated to me that until
anything whatever regarding natural phenomena, or natural law.
years of his life previously had been spent exclusively among the
  The case, I regret to say, is typical.
without prejudice to humanity, separate the present from the past.
nineteenth century strikes its roots into the centuries gone by, and
  The world cannot afford to lose the record
time.
antiquity,--of our Socrates and Cato,--whose lives provoke us to
  As
mind, they must ever be of priceless value to humanity; but surely
that above referred to, universal.
ourselves of continents of land, concerning which antiquity knew
exploring human spirit, shall we not possess them also?  In these
of Nature which were quite hidden from the ancients, and we should be
and aspirations of the Present out of deference to the Past.

always feel to seize upon every possible opportunity of checking my
  In the present case, it is
tendency of the human mind to inquire into the phenomena presented to
this, I take advantage of the facts which have fallen in my way
are truly representative and general, and not merely individual and

At an agricultural college in Hampshire, with which I was connected
general education of youth, a Society was formed among the boys, who
subjects.
of its proceedings were published in a little monthly periodical
  One of the most remarkable features of
concluded, each member enjoyed the right of asking questions on any
  The questions were either
suggest itself during the meeting, it was written upon a slip of paper
aloud.
boys made a common stock of their wisdom in furnishing replies.
might be expected from an assemblage of eighty or ninety boys, varying
 To
instincts of humanity generally, such questions are not without a
derogatory to the present course of Lectures to copy a few of them,
  They run as follows:
What are the duties of the Astronomer Royal?
What is frost?
Why are thunder and lightning more frequent in summer than in winter?
What occasions falling stars?
What is the cause of the sensation called 'pins and needles '?
What is the cause of waterspouts?
What is the cause of hiccup?
If a towel be wetted with water, why does the wet portion become







circle, while a white hat remains stationary?
What is the cause of perspiration?
Is it true that men were once monkeys?
What is the difference between the soul and the mind?
Is it contrary to the rules of Vegetarianism to eat eggs?
In looking over these questions, which were wholly unprompted, and
that many of them are suggested directly by natural objects, and are

desire to know its cause.
desire is to be gratified or not.
implanted the desire?  Certainly not man.
place himself between the desire and its fulfilment, and proclaim a
towel, which at first sight appears to be one of the most unpromising
 Shall we tell the proposer to repress his
interpose our wisdom to rescue the boy from the consequences of a wish
question, how shall we answer it?  It is impossible to answer it
some extent a natural philosopher.
to the reflection of light at the common surface of two media of
  But this answer presupposes on the part
reduces you to the necessity of explaining them.

belongs to a class of phenomena which have long excited the interest
  The towel is white for the same reason that snow is
that the salt we use at table is white.
entering another, a portion of light is always reflected, but on this
 Thus,
common surface of both, and it is this light which enables us to see
  But when a transparent solid is immersed in a liquid of
  I
if by magic, with the exception of the crystalline lens, and the
vitreous humour had been instantly dissolved.
the case, and a comparison of the refractive index of the humour with
  The indices were
formed one continuous mass.

solid mixed with air.
from air to solid, a portion of light is reflected, and this takes
  Thus from the
  Now the
  The tissue is composed of
filled with air; repeated reflection takes place at the limiting
snow or salt.
the reflection; a portion of the light is transmitted, and the
  Thus the
transparency of tracing paper used by engineers, and many other
simple enquiry of this unsuspecting little boy.

question long agitated, and finally set at rest by the beautiful
  I do not think that any boy of average
falls.
acquainted with the notions of the middle ages, he may refer to the
dew and exposed to the sun, will rise like a balloon--a swan's egg
  It is impossible to
question refers, without first making him acquainted with the
  Take, for example, a blade of

During the day the grass, and the earth beneath it, possess a certain
radiated from the surface of the grass into space, and to supply the
  Thus the
  Now, in
of conduction is small; the consequence is that the blade loses more
  The
it, and there accumulates to form the little pearly globe which we

Thus the boy finds the simple and homely fact which addressed his
  The fact
invested for him with a beauty for evermore.
things which, at first sight, seem to stand isolated and without
detection of such analogies a source of perpetual delight.
pleasure on the side of intellectual performance is a point of the
body, depends for its value upon the spirit in which it is
  Every physician knows that something more than mere
exercise--that, indeed, being most healthful which makes us forget all
  What, for example, could
for the mere love of playing, and without reference to physiological
makes his very indifference beneficial to him.
systematic motions, you may devise means for the more perfect traction
of the game, and where these are absent, the charm and the health of
  The case is similar with the education of the

The study of Physics, as already intimated, consists of two processes,
causes, and the logical advance from the cause to the fact.
former process, called _induction_, certain moral qualities come into
  The first condition of success is patient industry, an honest
however cherished, if they be found to contradict the truth.
me, a self-renunciation which has something lofty in it, and of which
the true votary of science.
self-renunciation--this loyal surrender of himself to Nature and to

Thus the earnest prosecutor of science, who does not work with the
than the transitory blaze of to-day's fame, who comes to his task with
moral culture.
privacy, this sacrifice of self, this upright determination to accept
scientific foe, if necessary--carries with it its own reward.
prejudice is put under foot and the stains of personal bias have been
Nature's organ--his elevation is the instant consequence of his

I should not wonder if my remarks provoked a smile, for they seem to
an angelic, character; and cases may occur to you which indicate the
  You may point to the quarrels of scientific men, to their
around its little property of discovery like a scared plover about its
  I will not deny all this; but let it be set down to its proper
but not to the charge of Physical Science.

advance of the mind from fixed principles to the conclusions which
  The rules of logic are the formal statement of this
ever such rules were written.
deduction are perpetually wedded to each other.
strips facts of their peculiarities of form, and tries to unite them
checks his induction.

those of the ancients, becomes manifest.
matters: they omitted the process of induction, and substituted
  They could never, therefore, fulfil the
' The
her secrets and the patient mastery of her laws.
enables us to protect ourselves from the hostile action of natural
  By the study of Physics we have
dreamed.
better acquainted with the laws of Mind; for to the mental philosopher
projects its own image, and thus becomes capable of self-inspection.

exercises and sharpens observation: it brings the most exhaustive
a mental scenery appropriate to these processes.
precision of thought is everywhere enforced, and prudence, foresight,
  By its appeals to experiment, it

intellectual gymnastics, such as the ancients delighted in, but tends
  This gradual conquest of the external
it, render the study of Physics as delightful as it is important.

cool results of physical induction furnish conceptions which transcend
  Take for example the idea of
finger ends of the universe every time a street lamp is lighted.
invisible billows of this aether can be measured with the same ease
angles, and from these finds the distance across the Thames.
is to be confessed that there may be just as little poetry in the
the intellect, during the acts of measurement and calculation,
  It
 Young, that
    An undevout astronomer is mad;
there being no necessary connexion between a devout state of mind and
  It is
his work, and thus realizes the great idea on which he has been
  There is, I admit,
  If the arithmetical processes of science be
study of Physics is open to the same objection as philological,
  But even
not reach the mass of mankind.
his cold unimaginative reckonings may furnish themes for the poet, and
notwithstanding all its foolish vagaries, table-turning included, I,

I have thus far dwelt upon the study of Physics as an agent of
subserves more than a single end.
the eye, and, no doubt, accomplish moral purposes also, but the
fields are rendered fruitful.
invite our investigation; but they also extend their beneficent
intellectual ends, but minister, at the same time, to our material
  And so it is with scientific research.

science, and the investigator, in the prosecution of his enquiries, is
may exercise a potent influence upon the physical condition of the
  This is the arrangement of Nature, and not that of the
without regard to its practical applications.

steam-engine and the electric telegraph the highest embodiment of
beware of prescribing conditions to the investigator.
of attempting to substitute for that simple love with which the votary
call utility.
cases, the very last man to see the occult sources from which useful
  He admires the flower, but is ignorant of the
  The scientific man must approach Nature in
considerations, it may be at the expense of those qualities on which
  Let the self-styled practical
thousands like him, have sprung into existence.
their first enquiries by the calculations of utility?  Not one of
  They were often forced to live low and lie hard, and to seek
pursuits afforded them.

not merely look at the pittance of men like John Dalton, or the
as competency or affluence by your Faradays, Liebigs, and Herschels,
enterprise: then compare the amount of mind put forth, the work done
the former belong to a class of workers who, properly speaking, are
to which no payment could stimulate.

human knowledge, and aiming at the conquest of fresh soil from the
exclusive object for the time, he cannot but feel the deepest interest
  There is
  Apart even
Man having tamed that wild force which flashes through the telegraphic
  Our attainments in these
  We had already
it was in their power to render: we must either stand still, or find
  At this point the
  These are still new things; it is not long
results.
achievements of Science, but rather as an earnest of what she is yet
  They mark our first great advances upon the dominion of
  Animal strength fails, but here are the forces which hold the
these forces are his when he is wise enough to command them.

profitable to all: as bearing upon special functions, its value,
  Why, for example, should
they are called upon to legislate?  In this land of practical physics,
physical question?  Why should the member of a parliamentary committee
question is discussed, until he deems the nap a blessing which rescues
does not supply the want here referred to, fails in its duty to
  With regard to our working people, in the ordinary sense of
profitable, not only as a means of intellectual culture, but also as a
  A
direct action of the will.
employment which shall break the force of temptation by erecting a
  The drunkard, for example, is in a perilous
he will avoid strong drink.
force, will revert to the public-house, and to rescue him permanently

By investing the objects of hourly intercourse with an interest which
and every one of these would be a point of force to protect him
  Besides this, our factories and our foundries
them rendered capable, by previous culture, of _observing_ what they
  Who can say what intellectual
mills and forges of Manchester and Birmingham?  Grant these Samsons
prospects of national advancement.
operations we are constantly playing with forces our ignorance of
  There are agencies at
but which nevertheless may be sufficient to convert it into an engine
  When we reflect on the intellectual condition of the people
time to time need not astonish us.
physical knowledge, from the operatives themselves would probably

necessary stimulus to its practical application, and thus two ends
diminution of the calamity.

many misgivings as to the propriety of my taking a part in them,
experienced man.
resolved to adhere, and I have therefore described things as they
limited practice.
expression of this mind, even in small particulars, will attest itself

to refer to a fact or two in addition to those already cited, which
in the college already alluded to.
humble, and deviating in some slight degree from the strict subject of
principle.

class in mathematics, and I usually found that Euclid and the ancient
understanding, formed a most attractive study for youth.
my habitual practice to withdraw the boys from the routine of the
not comprehended in that routine.
beaten track usually excited aversion: the youth felt like a child

of Newton, where he attributes the difference between him and other
servant, who had stated something to be impossible, never again to use
  Thus cheered, the boy has returned to his
which, nevertheless, evinced a resolution to try again.
his eye brighten, and, at length, with a pleasure of which the ecstasy
it, sir.
immense value; and, animated by it, the progress of the class was
  It was often my custom to give the boys the choice of
at others not to be found there.
book chosen.
offers of assistance were habitually declined.
the sweets of intellectual conquest and demanded victories of their
  Their diagrams were scratched on the walls, cut into the beams
of the living interest they took in the subject.
far as experience in teaching goes, I was a mere fledgling--knowing
adhering to the spirit indicated at the commencement of this
branch of education.
most delightful hours of my existence have been spent in marking the
the manner here described.

to the solution of physical problems.
had thus a new interest and significance imparted to them.
the see-saw, the tension of the giant-stride ropes, the fall and
when turning short, particularly in slippy weather; all became
  A lady stands before a looking-glass, of
really useful to her?  We learned with pleasure the economic fact that
notwithstanding.
verify by experiment, that the angular velocity of a reflected beam is
  From the hum of a bee we
in a second.
learned how Colonel Sabine had made it the means of determining the
the pendulum enabled us to draw, that if the diurnal velocity of the
at the equator would be precisely equal to the force of gravitation,
tendency to fall upwards as downwards.
of wonder and delight to us: and when we remembered that we were
same great field was ours to work in, our hopes arose that at some
add our own victories to the conquests already won.

but the days spent among these young philosophers made a deep
  I learned among them something of myself and of
  If
it to be that of the schoolmaster; and if there be a position where
moral tone and exciting irreverence and cunning where reverence and
principal of a school.
among boys, when he allows his spirit to stream through them, and
of theirs,--it would be idle to talk of the position of such a man
  It is a blessed position.
himself and to all around him.
in England, and it behoves those who busy themselves with the
  For no
philological, success must ever mainly depend upon the amount of life,
his vocation.

which finds in me to-day its unripened advocate, are those of the
an agent of culture, are based upon the natural relations subsisting
  On the one
other side, mind, which requires law for its equilibrium, and through
experience, knows that these phenomena are reducible to law.
chasten this apparent chaos is a problem which man has set before him.
The world was built in order: and to us are trusted the will and power

provoke inquiry.
considerations which lie closer to us as a nation--as a land of gas
practically applied, has made great in peace and mighty in war: I ask
expect from her institutions a culture more in accordance with her
if the tendency should be to lower the estimate of science, by
it be the high mission of our universities to furnish the proper
mind to the contemplation of it as the last development of that
thoughts of men.


  ON CRYSTALLINE AND SLATY CLEAVAGE.

Great Britain, June 6, 1856.

of any natural force, his first care must be to purify it from the
  If, for
at liberty to follow the bent of its own molecular forces, he must see
  We might
here we have to do, not only with the action of the molecules of the
mass, which pulls the drop downwards and elongates it.
examine the problem in its purity, he must do as Plateau has done,
the shape to be a perfect sphere.
mixed manner, and to the uninstructed mind are a mass of
  Suppose half-a-dozen of the best musical
instrument to perfection, but no two playing the same tune; though
the mixture of all would produce mere noise.

molecular laws intermingle and create apparent confusion.
mixture constitutes what may be called the _noise_ of natural laws, and
its components, and thus to detect the underlying music.

nowhere more strikingly exhibited than in the phenomena of
  Here, for example, is a solution of common sulphate
  Looking into it mentally, we see the
eye, arranging themselves into battalions, gathering round distinct
assume the visible shape of the crystal now held in my hand.
like an ignorant meddler wishing to hasten matters, introduce
  This may be done by plunging a glass rod
the crystalline forces; the molecules rush together with the confusion
disciplined host.
confused crystallisation; but in the crucible behind me a slower
chips, no din,' and who is now building the particles into crystals,
upon the table.
we obtain these perfect octahedrons; by allowing carbonate of lime to
crystallises, we have formed these hexagonal prisms capped at the ends
prismatic masses, and when carbon crystallises, we have the diamond.
If we wish to obtain a perfect crystal we must allow the molecular
a surface it will be flattened, and to prevent this a small crystal
or, if it rest upon the surface, it must be turned daily so as to

In building up crystals these little atomic bricks often arrange
which can be separated by mechanical means; this is called the
  The crystal of sugar I hold in my hand has
determine the fate of sugar-candy.
with peculiar facility in one direction.
this piece of rocksalt, and with a blow cleave it in one direction.
Laying the knife at right angles to its former position, the crystal
two former positions, we find a third cleavage.
three directions, and the resulting solid is this perfect cube, which
  Iceland spar also
other, the resulting solid being a rhomboid.
the mass cleaves with equal facility in all three directions.
sake of completeness I may say that many crystals cleave with unequal
this kind of cleavage.

term cleavage may be applied.
with facility along the fibre, and this cleavage is most perfect when
the tree.
will see a sort of cleavage in it also; the stalks lie in horizontal

as that of the hayrick.
themselves according to organic laws which produce a cleavable
due to the mechanical arrangement of the coarse sensible stalks of

This sandstone rock was once a powder held in mechanical suspension by
  The powder was composed of two distinct parts, fine grains of
  Imagine a wide strand covered by a
how will it sink?  The rounded grains of sand will reach the bottom
and when the tide recedes we have the little plates shining like
  Each successive tide brings
and finally masses of immense thickness are piled up, which by
formation.
allow them to subside; they will arrange themselves in the manner
mass which shall be the exact counterpart of that presented by nature.
Now this structure cleaves with readiness along the planes in which
  Specimens of such a rock sent to me
Lancashire, are here before you.
cleave them into flags; indeed these flags are employed for roofing
receive the name of 'slatestone.
from me, that this cleavage is not a crystalline cleavage any more
  It is molar, not molecular.

been agreed among geologists not to call such splitting as this
different character.

Wales will have witnessed the phenomenon to which I refer.
long drawn our supply of roofing-slates from such quarries;
churchyards, and for billiard-tables in the metropolis; but not until
wonderful structure was produced.
to split Honister Crag, or the cliffs of Snowdon, into laminae from
great difficulties of geologists, and occupies their attention perhaps
  You may wonder at this.
of Penrhyn, you may be disposed to offer the explanation I heard given
  'These planes of cleavage,' said a friend who stood
which have been lifted by some convulsion into an almost vertical
' But this was a mistake, and indeed here lies the grand
  The planes of cleavage stand in most cases
  Thanks to Sir Roderick Murchison, I
  Here is a specimen of
distinctly marked, one of them making a large angle with the other.
This is common.
stratification; what then is its cause?
In an able and elaborate essay published in 1835, Prof.
proposed the theory that cleavage is due to the action of crystalline
  'We may
dimensions in passing to a solid state, can explain such phenomena.
They appear to me only resolvable on the supposition that crystalline
direction and with adequate force.
'Crystalline forces have re-arranged whole mountain masses, producing
strata.
 ii,
 iii.
 477.

minds of geologists, and at the present day there are few who do not
 [Footnote: In a letter
1836, Sir John Herschel writes as follows: 'If rocks have been so
say, if they have been heated to a point at which the particles can
general law must then determine the position in which these particles
  Probably that position will have some relation
  Now when all or a
one position, that must of course determine a cleavage plane.
boldness of the theory, indeed, has, in some cases, caused speculation
and geologic magnetism, which rather astonish those who know something
  According to this theory whole districts of North
than the parts of a gigantic crystal.
originally fine mud, composed of the broken and abraded particles of
  They contain silica, alumina, potash, soda, and mica
  In the course of ages the mixture became
crystallisation afterwards rearranged the particles and developed in
  Though a bold, and I think
service.
power which operates against intellectual stagnation; and even by

geologists themselves, men were not found to seek an explanation of

The first step in an enquiry of this kind is to seek facts.
been done, and the labours of Daniel Sharpe (the late President of the
who knew him, has so suddenly been taken away from us), Mr.
Clifton Sorby, and others, have furnished us with a body of facts
upon the question.

  I have here several
positions in regard to the cleavage planes.
distorted, and crushed; in all cases the distortion leads to the
to enormous pressure in a direction at right angles to the planes of
  The shells are all flattened and spread out in these
  Compare this fossil trilobite of normal proportions with
  Some have lain across,
they are found; but in all cases the distortion is such, as required
planes of cleavage.
gigantic vice appear to have closed upon them and squeezed them into

We sometimes find a thin layer of coarse gritty material, between two
the planes of lamination.
pressure into sinuosities like a contorted ribbon.
 Sorby has
  This crumpling can be
roughly estimated by supposing the contorted bed to be stretched out,
it has been squeezed.
mass has been considerable.

the varying colours which indicate the bedding on this mass of slate.
The dark portion is gritty, being composed of comparatively coarse
and constitute the bottom of each layer.
top the coarseness diminishes, and near the upper surface we have a
  It is the fine mud thus consolidated
sharpening of surgical instruments.

slab of the coarse slate in contact with it; when the fine bed is
slate, and thus rendered stronger.
might be expected, often rolled up into nodular masses, carried
the slate-mud has subsided.
sandstone.
must remember the whitish-green spots which sometimes dotted the
spots were greasy.
they could not, on account of their fineness, bite the pencil like the
  Here is a beautiful example
round patches.
nodule is seen to be a sharp oval with its longer axis parallel to the
  This instructive fact has been adduced by Mr.
  I
many of the slate yards of London, and found the fact general.
we elevate a common experience of our boyhood into evidence of the

these spots contain a less amount of iron than the surrounding dark
  An analysis was made for me by Mr.
Dr.


Dark Slate, two analyses.

  Percentage of iron     5.

 Percentage of iron      6.

99
Whitish Green Slate.

  Percentage of iron     3.

  Percentage of iron     3.

18
According to these analyses the quantity of iron in the dark slate
quantity contained in the spot itself.
which the magnetic experiments suggested.

typical--each is the representative of a class.
crushed; the trilobites squeezed, beds contorted, nodules of greenish
to one and the same conclusion, namely, that slate-rocks have been
Planes of cleavage.

 Sorby's contorted bed, I have said that by
give us an idea of the amount of yielding of the mass above and below
  Such a measurement, however, would not give the exact amount
  I hold in my hand a specimen of slate with its bedding
comparatively coarse gritty material something like what you may
  Now in crossing these
bedding at another angle.
intermediate bed, which is not entirely unyielding, suffered
transverse, and the direction of its cleavage is exactly such as you
the bed, nor yet in the same direction as the cleavage of the slate
  Supposing the
which it ought to take across these more unyielding strata.

and pressure--that they accompany each other; but the question still
single geologist, as far as I am aware, answers boldly in the
  This geologist is Sorby, who has attacked the question
  Call to mind the
the interposition of layers of mica between the gritty strata.

  He
containing such plates confusedly mixed up in it?  It will be, he
surfaces more or less perpendicular to the direction in which the
  He takes scales of the oxide of iron, mixes them
of the scales is to set themselves at right angles to the line of
  Along the planes of weakness produced by the scales the

By tests of a different character from those applied by Mr.
might be shown how true his conclusion is--that the effect of pressure

ascribe to them a large share in the production of the cleavage.
believe that even if the plates of mica were wholly absent, the

Here is a mass of pure white wax: it contains no mica particles, no
  Here is the selfsame
  I would invite the attention of the
  No
surpassing tenuity, and proves at a single stroke that pressure is
of intermixed plates or scales.
elongated particles, and am unable to say at the present moment that
should say they rather impair its fineness and clearness than promote

The finer the slate is the more perfect will be the resemblance of its
  Compare the surface of the wax with the
  You have
surfaces of each, which have been partially torn away in cleaving.
any close observer compare these two effects, he will, I am persuaded,

with the fingers, and pressed it between thick plates of glass
  At the ordinary summer temperature the pressed wax
compressed specimens in a mixture of pounded ice and salt, and when
]
But you will ask me how, according to my view, does pressure produce

There is no such thing in nature as a body of perfectly homogeneous
  I break this clay which seems so uniform, and find that
has given way, and it has yielded along those surfaces because in them
  I break this marble,
bottom of a dried pond; look at some of the ungravelled walks in
and other circumstances being equal, they crack and split where the
  Take then a mass of partially consolidated
  Such a mass is divided and subdivided by interior surfaces along
  Penetrate the mass in
bounded by surfaces of weak cohesion.
to pressure,--it yields and spreads out in the direction of least
separated from each other by surfaces of weak cohesion, and the
line of pressure.
mass were squeezed equally in all directions no laminated structure

 Warren De la Rue informs me that he once wished to obtain
compressed it.
spread out a little laterally.
of slate, and it quite defeated him in his effort to obtain a granular
]
Further, a mass of dried mud is full of cavities and fissures.
break dried pipe-clay you see them in great numbers, and there are
  A flattening of
extent facilitate the cleavage of the mass in the direction indicated.

these thoughts, yet for the last twelve months the subject has
  I
cleavage developed by the rolling-pin.
biscuit across, and to look at the fracture, to see the laminated
  We have here the means of pushing the analogy further.
invite you to compare the structure of this slate, which was subjected
 Scott Russell's
  Air or vapour within the slate has
precisely that of a biscuit.
much instruction in the manufacture of puff-paste.
paste baked under my own superintendence.
is accidental cleavage, but this is cleavage with intention.
volition of the pastrycook has entered into its formation.
been his aim to preserve a series of surfaces of structural weakness,
  Puff-paste in preparation
cold slab, to prevent the butter from melting, and diffusing itself,


The principle here enunciated is so simple as to be almost trivial;
permitted, it might be shown you that the principle has a much wider
  When iron is taken from the puddling furnace it
at a welding heat, and at this temperature is submitted to the process
  Bright smooth bars are the result.
the high heat the nodules do not perfectly blend together.
process of rolling draws them into fibres.
by dilute sulphuric acid, which exhibits in a striking manner this
  The experiment was made by my friend Dr.
without any reference to the question of cleavage.

the iron, you elongate these granules, and finally render the mass
  Here are pieces of rails along which the wheels of
plates.
belong, I believe, to the great class of phenomena of which slaty
 [Footnote: For some further
 Sorby and myself, see
]
We have now reached the termination of our task.
the phenomena of crystallisation, and have had placed before you the

spiritual vision, by which we can see backward through the night of
the earth's surface
        Ere the lion roared,

From evidence of the most independent and trustworthy character, we
enormous pressure, and by the sure method of experiment we have
before you--how the pressure is sufficient to produce the cleavage.
Expanding our field of view, we find the self-same law, whose
into the domain of the pastrycook and ironfounder; nay, a wheel cannot
more or less of the features of this law.
that the spirit in which this problem has been attacked by geologists,
  The great
present pitch of grandeur, were compelled to deal with the subject in
  But the desire for more
leave untouched the intrinsic wonders of geology, are gradually
subject in its infancy.
possible, the conditions of nature, and to produce her results; they
the day will soon come when we shall interlace our friendly arms
tasks in a spirit of mutual helpfulness, encouragement and goodwill.

the footnote concerning Mr.
finely granular white-lead, accompanied as it is by tangential
  This
both in pressed wax and slate rock.
 T.
]
********************
XIII.

February 1, 1856.

centre of the earth, was entertained by Anaxagoras and his pupils, by
ancients were renewed by Galileo, Huyghens, and others, who stated
  Kepler
affirmed the extension of this force to the most distant stars.
it would appear, that in the attraction of iron by a magnet originated
  Nevertheless, if we look
possesses characters strikingly distinct from those of the force which
  The theory of gravitation is, that every
have attraction, but we have always, at the same time, repulsion, the
  A body
translation will follow, if the repulsion be equal to the attraction.
Previous to magnetization, a dipping needle, when its centre of
magnetization, one end of it, in our latitude, is pulled towards the
  The needle, however, being suspended from
magnetization.
upon a liquid, and thus to follow the attraction of the north magnetic

is attracted by the north pole, the unmarked end is repelled by an
other.

swimming needle, the latter is attracted,--the reason being that the
than the repelled end, the force of attraction is the more powerful of
  In the case of the earth, its pole is so distant that the
  In like manner, when a
attracted, while the more distant parts are repelled; and because the
have a balance in favour of attraction.
characteristic of the magnetic force, which distinguishes it from that
  The latter is a simple unpolar force, while the
  Were gravitation like magnetism, a stone
north magnetic pole: and thus, however rich in consequences the
force like that of magnetism would not be able to transact the

The object of this discourse is to enquire whether the force of
by the poles of a magnet, is to be ranged as a polar force, beside

surrounded by an electric current, the antithesis of its two ends, or,
action upon a magnetic needle; and it may be asked why a cylinder of
similarly examined.
is so feeble, that it would be quite masked by that of the helix in
excite a diamagnetic body that the pure action of the body upon a
used to excite the diamagnetic.

manner:
When through an upright helix of covered copper wire, a voltaic
repels, the same pole of a magnetic needle; its central point, on the

astatic system.
magnets, which were of the same strength, completely annulled the
]  The two magnets S N' and S'N are
the point a, so that both magnets swing in the same horizontal plane.
It is so arranged that the poles N' s' are opposite to the central or
latter, the magnets, as before explained, are unaffected.
we have an excited helix which itself has no action upon the magnets,
the helix and excited by it, undisturbed by the influence of the
  The helix being 12 inches high, a cylinder of soft iron 6
raised or lowered within the helix.
lower end rests upon the table, the upper end finds itself between the
  The iron cylinder is thus converted
other, and consequently deflecting the entire astatic system.
the cylinder is raised so that the upper end is at the level of the
deflection opposed in direction to the former one is the immediate
  To render these deflections more easily visible, a
upon the mirror being reflected and projected as a bright disk against
  The distance of this image from the mirror being
slight motion of the magnet is sufficient to produce a displacement of

This then is the principle of the beautiful apparatus [Footnote:
 W.
 Leyser, of Leipzig.
by which the investigation was conducted.
second helix be placed between the poles SN with a cylinder within
  This was the
  Thus to intensify the
first place neutralized the action of the earth upon the magnets, by
  Secondly, by making use of two cylinders,
magnets, we have rendered the deflecting force four times what it
  Finally, the whole
from air-currents, and the deflections were read off through a glass
considerable distance from the instrument.

  Sending a current
free, it was first arranged that the bismuth cylinders within the
the magnets.
cross wire of the telescope was 572.
one up the other down, so that two of their ends were brought to bear
after some oscillations [Footnote: To lessen these a copper damper was
]  came to rest at the number 612; thus moving from a
  The other two ends of the bars were next
consequence, and the final position of equilibrium was 526; the
  We thus observe a
pair of ends deflecting it in one direction, and the other pair

Substituting for the cylinders of bismuth thin cylinders of iron, of
of iron, red ferrocyanide of potassium, and other magnetic bodies, it
same as that of the cylinders of bismuth, the deflection produced by
latter; and hence the disposition of the force in the diamagnetic body
magnetic ones.

inference, that the deflection produced by the bismuth cylinders may
the helices.
first place, that the deflection is permanent, and cannot therefore be
  It has
metals, and with better conductors than bismuth; for if due to
be the effect.

Cylinders of antimony were substituted for those of bismuth.
metal is a better conductor of electricity, but less strongly
  If therefore the action referred to be due
antimony than with bismuth; but if it springs from a true diamagnetic
antimony.
  Hence the
not to their conductive capacity.
examined: here we have a metal which conducts electricity fifty times
effects be due to induced currents we ought to have them here in an
by the two cylinders of copper.

coat fragments of bismuth with some insulating substance, so as to
question with cylinders of these fragments.
fulfilled.
expose it for a short time to the air to cause the particles to become
  The
nevertheless, this powder, enclosed in glass tubes, exhibited an
cylinders.

who have denied the antithesis of magnetism and diamagnetism, remains
  Prisms of the same heavy glass as that with which the
cylinders, and their action upon the magnet was proved to be precisely
  The enquiry was
calcareous spar, statuary marble, with the same invariable result:
the force being the same as that of bismuth and the reverse of that of
  When a bar of iron is set erect, its lower end is known to be a
induction.
pole, and its head a north pole, and there is no doubt that the same
earth's surface is a true diamagnet, with its poles the reverse of

An experiment of practical value, as affording a ready estimate of the
exhibited in the lecture, for the purpose of proving experimentally
  A cube of
electro-magnet.
little square pyramid, the base of which was horizontal, and its sides
  A beam of
followed the motion of the cube the images cast from its sides
thirty feet in diameter.
images blended into a continuous ring of light.
instant the electro-magnet was excited, currents were evolved in the
with the conductivity of the cube for electricity, was practically
mirrors to a state of rest.
of seconds or more: a cube of copper, on the contrary, was struck

********************
XIV.

[Footnote: From a discourse delivered at the Royal Institution of
]
OMITTING all preface, attention was first drawn to an experimental
different degrees.
ordinary ring gas-burner, and on this was placed a hot copper ball,
  Behind the screen, but so
excellent Thermo-electric pile, connected by wires with a very
  The pile was known to be an instrument whereby
of the current being an accurate measure of the quantity of the heat.
As long as both faces of the pile are at the same temperature, no
of the two faces at once declares itself by the production of a
the deflection of the needle both its strength and its direction.

same temperature; the equilibrium being shown by the needle of the
  The rays emitted by the current of hot
of the pile; and an extremely slight movement of the needle showed
feeble.
gas; and by turning a cock, a stream of this gas was permitted to
column in front of the pile.
itself, as a radiator of heat, to be quite as feeble as atmospheric

A second holder containing olefiant gas was then connected with the
  Oxygen and air had already flowed over the ball and
  Hence the olefiant gas laboured under a
  But on permitting the gas to rise from the ball, it
sufficient to impel the needle of the galvanometer almost to 90°.
experiment proved the vast difference between two equally invisible

The converse experiment was now performed.
was removed and placed between two cubes filled with water kept in a
quantities of heat falling from the cubes on the opposite faces of the
  The needle of
issue from a slit between one of the cubes and the adjacent face of
  If this sheet of gas possessed any sensible power of
being deprived of the heat thus intercepted, a difference of
result would be declared by the galvanometer.
by the oxygen under those circumstances was too feeble to affect the
rays of heat.
equally feeble power of absorption.

to issue from the same slit as that through which the oxygen had
  No one present could see the gas; it was quite invisible, the
effect upon the thermal rays emanating from the cube was what might be
  A quantity so large was cut off, that
with energy to its stops.
and pervious to luminous rays, was proved to be a most potent
  The
here; the good radiator is found by this experiment to be the good

This result, now exhibited before a public audience for the first

find radiation and absorption to be as rigidly associated as positive
magnetism.
absorptive power the numerator of a fraction, and that which expresses
account of the numerator and denominator varying in the same,
whatever might be the gas or vapour experimented with.

absorption?  what is the meaning of radiation?  When you cast a stone
motion is radiated on all sides from the centre of disturbance.
a hammer strikes a bell, the latter vibrates; and sound, which is
directions.
mechanical category.
of vibration; a hot body is one with its atoms also vibrating, but at
sounding body has the air around it, through which it propagates its
aether, which accepts its motions and carries them forward with
  Radiation, then, as regards both light and
aether in which it swings: and, as in the case of sound, the motion
against which the aerial undulations strike, the sound being, in
absorption consists in the transference of motion from the agitated

The simple atoms are found to be bad radiators; the compound atoms
grouping, the more potent, as a general rule, is the radiation and
  Let us get definite ideas here, however gross, and purify
  Imagine our simple
the swell which a group of them united to form a system can produce.
An oar runs freely edgeways through the water, and imparts far less of
bear upon it.
is a good radiator; broad side horizontal, it is a bad radiator.
Conversely the waves of water, impinging upon the flat face of the
impinging upon the edge.
well, it also absorbs well.
without much resistance; compound ones encounter resistance, and hence
  Mix oxygen and
heat.
both the absorption and radiation are thereby augmented hundreds of

systems, and obtain a conception of processes which the eye of sense
  But gases and vapours possess a power of choice as
  They single out certain groups of rays
  This is
modified to suit present requirements.
its ends stopped by discs of plate-glass, a small quantity of nitrous
rich brown colour.
two prisms of bisulphide of carbon, a spectrum seven feet long and
  Introducing the
issues from the lamp, the splendid and continuous spectrum becomes
are intercepted by the nitric gas, while the light which falls upon

Here also the principle of reciprocity, as regards radiation and
physical character, render that nitrous gas luminous, we should find
emit.
intense incandescence by the passage of an electric spark, the spectra
  But
of ordinary gases, we make use of metals heated so highly as to
  This is easily done by the voltaic current.
capsule of carbon filled with mercury, which formed the positive
it.
the mercury in a volatilised condition passes between them.
spectrum of this arc is not continuous like that of the solid carbon
colour to that particular portion of the spectrum to which its rays
  Copper gives its system of bands; zinc gives its system; and
of the bands belonging to both metals.

an alloy, is it possible to obtain the bands which belong to them.
matter how we may disguise the metal--allowing it to unite with oxygen
heat applied be sufficiently intense, the bands belonging to the metal
  Into holes drilled in a
  When the
spectrum shows the brilliant yellow lines of the metal sodium.
Similar experiments made with the chlorides of strontium, calcium,
spectrum is extraordinary; the spectrum, moreover, contained a blue
  It was thought by many, during the
band had never before been seen.
and my friend Dr.
use of, pronounces it pure chloride of lithium.
 T.
metals, give the bands due to the respective metals.
salts are mixed together, and rammed into holes in the carbon; a

The position of these bright bands never varies, and each metal has
  Hence the competent observer can infer from the bands
  It is a language
be augmented if each metal possessed the power of audibly calling out,
  If we find
it is a declaration on the part of these orbs that such metals enter
  Does the sun give us any such intimation?
with those produced by our terrestrial metals, and prove either their
  The solar spectrum, when closely
ones.
 Wollaston, but were multiplied
him Fraunhofer's lines.
philosophers.
also known to us for years; but the connection between both classes of
acuteness, revealed the secret, and placed it at the same time in our

We have now some difficult work before us.
delighted by objects which addressed themselves as much to our
pleasantly to the base of the final cone of Etna, and must now
prospect from the summit.
Fraunhofer with the bright ones of the metals.
lamp is refracted in passing through our two prisms, but its different
are drawn apart.

atoms of the luminous body; red light being produced by one rate, blue
the intermediate rates.
continuous spectrum; or in other words they emit rays of all possible
  Colour, as many of
  When a violin-player
thus, causing it to vibrate more speedily, heightens the pitch.
Imagine such a player to move his fingers slowly along the string,
pitch by a regular gradation; there would be no gap intervening
  Here we have the analogue to the continuous
interruption, from the red of the lowest pitch to the violet of the
 But suppose the player, instead of gradually shortening his
corresponding note; then to pass on to another point more or less
particular notes separated from each other by gaps which correspond to
analogue of a spectrum composed of separate bright bands with
  But this, though a perfectly true
look with the mind's eye at the oscillating atoms of the volatilised

Figure these atoms as connected together by springs of a certain
asunder, and if the atoms are drawn apart, pull them again together,
certain definite rate determined by the strength of the spring.
the volatilised metal which gives us one bright band is to be figured
vibrations are all of one kind.
may be figured as having some of its atoms united by springs of one
  Its vibrations
are to figure as many distinct sets of springs, each capable of
others.
in dropping the metaphor of springs, and substituting for it mentally
  Having thus far

A heavy ivory ball is here suspended from a string.
this ball; a single puff of my breath moves it a little way from its
limit of its swing I puff again.
timing the puffs I can so accumulate their action as to produce
  The ivory ball here has absorbed the
  I now bring the ball
 Suppose, instead of the breath, a wave of air to strike
succeed each other exactly in the same intervals as my puffs; it is
and cause it to swing as the puffs did.
that this would not be the case if the impulses of the waves were not
wave would be neutralised by another, and there could not be the
correspond with the periods of the pendulum.
particular impulses absorbed by the pendulum.
set oscillating in air could produce waves in the air, it is evident
whose motions it would take up or absorb most completely, if they
  Perhaps the most curious effect of these timed
Ellicott, in the year 1741.
same rail; one of them, which we may call A, was set going; the other,
  Some time afterwards he found, to his surprise, that B was
  The pendulums being of the same length, the shocks
rested were propagated to B, and were so timed as to set B going.
Other curious effects were at the same time observed.
pendulums differed from each other a certain amount, set B going, but
  Then B set A going, and the re-action of
  When the periods of oscillation were close to each
other, and by a kind of compromise they ticked in perfect unison.

actions of the universe are all modes of motion; and the vibration of

same periods as the waves, the motion of the waves will be absorbed by
flame, the atoms of that flame will be chiefly affected by those

motion from the agitated aether to the atoms of the volatilised metal,

The experiment justifying this conclusion is now for the first time to
  I pass a beam through our two
  Between
  Alcohol and
them is heated by a spirit-lamp.
and we have a monochromatic flame.
the lamp is now passing; and observe the result upon the spectrum.
see a shady band cut out of the yellow,--not very dark, but

But let me exalt this effect.
the intense flame of a large Bunsen's burner, a platinum capsule
into the flame.
incandescence.
yellow band of the spectrum is clearly and sharply cut out, a band of
  On withdrawing the sodium, the
reintroduction of the flame causes the band to reappear.

over a sensible space, blending on one side with the orange and on the
  The term 'yellow band' is therefore somewhat
  This vagueness may be entirely removed.
carbon-point used for the positive electrode into a solution of common
the sodium vapour stands out from the spectrum.
is caused to act upon the beam it is that particular yellow band that

An additional step of reasoning leads to the conclusion that if,
path of the beam a flame in which lithium, strontium, magnesium,
would cut out a system of bands, corresponding exactly in position
  The light of our
spectrum cut up by dark lines, exactly as the solar spectrum is cut up

Thus by the combination of the strictest reasoning with the most
scientific problems--the constitution of the sun.
a nucleus surrounded by a flaming atmosphere.
nucleus would give us a continuous spectrum, like that of our common
had to pass through the flame, those rays of the nucleus which the
corresponding to the particular rays absorbed, occur in the spectrum.
Abolish the solar nucleus, and we should have a spectrum showing a
  These
corresponding to the difference between the light of the nucleus
latter.

Professor of Natural Philosophy in the University of Heidelberg;
] but, like
 Mr.
Talbot observed the bright lines in the spectra of coloured flames.
Sixteen years ago Dr.
spectra of various coloured flames.
ingenuity, analysed the light of the electric spark, and showed that
in the spectrum of the spark.
bands; Van der Willigen, and more recently Plucker, have given us
Ruhmkorff's coil.
least knowledge of the connection between the bright bands of the
  The man who came
  In a paper
the 'Philosophical Magazine' for 1855, he indicates that the rays
rendered luminous.
giving the general impression of a reversal of the solar spectrum.
Foucault, Stokes, and Thomson, have all been very close to the
absorption of heat by gases and vapours, some of the results of which
led me in 1859 to the law on which all Kirchhoff's speculations are
  But
  True, much
so did the laws of Kepler furnish to Newton the basis of the theory of
  But what Kirchhoff has done carries us far beyond all
  He has introduced the order of law
previous knowledge by showing its relationship to some of the most

********************
XV.

A LECTURE TO SCHOOLMASTERS.

of the lower animals, feel an interest in the laws by which natural
  A herd may be terrified by a thunderstorm;
solar eclipse; but neither birds nor cattle, as far as we know, ever
  It is otherwise
  The presence of natural objects, the occurrence of natural
penetrate beyond his organs of sense, and appeal to an inner power of
  No fact is
  He cannot limit himself to the
a series to which uniform experience assures him it must belong.
regards all that he witnesses in the present as the efflux and
system of events which is to follow.
which in his ruder state he accounted for natural events, is
also disappears, as the connection and mutual dependence of physical
regard Nature as an organic whole--as a body each of whose members
changing without break of continuity in the relation of cause and

The system of things which we call Nature is, however, too vast and
  As knowledge
investigation.
thus receive a greater amount of attention than could possibly be
whole.
spreading ever wider on all sides, is due in reality to the exertions
a single line.
fellow-men--taking it from spoken words or from written books--in some

he fails to attain that vitality of thought, and correctness of
alone impart.

subject of my own studies, and to which it is my duty to call your

it is usually restricted to a department which, perhaps, lies closer
  It deals with the phenomena and
electricity--with those of sound--with the pressures and motions of
undulation.
philosophy, though at present so large as to need the exclusive
  Astronomy is the
vastness of the field causing it, however, to bed regarded as a
  In chemistry physical agents play important
  By heat and light we cause atoms and molecules to unite or to
  Electricity exerts a similar power.
ability to separate nutritive compounds into their constituents, the
world.
to; unite with sudden explosion, and to form by their combination a
  Thus physics and chemistry intermingle.
agents are, however, employed by the chemist as a means to an end;
themselves, both qualitative and quantitative, are the primary objects

My duty here to-night is to spend an hour in telling how this subject
others.
whole, I select as a sample the subject of magnetism.
entertain you on the present occasion with an account of what natural
  I might point to those applications of
often mistaken for science itself.
on the steam-engine and the telegraph, the electrotype and the
inlets by which scientific thought filters into practical life.
would be easy compared with the task of informing you how you are to
you are to possess its facts and make them living seeds which shall
storehouse of memory.
recounting of scientific achievements; and it is one which, feeling my
accept.

  First and
actual observation.
pass into words half the sap is taken out of them.
example, to get a knowledge of magnetism; well, provide yourself with
what the book tells you; do not be satisfied with its descriptive
  Half of our book
descriptions often lack both force and truth; but, no matter how
the place of actual observation.
which are shorn off by the man who describes it.

half a crown for a straight bar-magnet, or, if you can afford it,
from a bar of steel an inch wide and half an inch thick; file its ends

will give you a suspending fibre void of torsion.
of paper, or of wire, and attach your fibre to it.
  In
they are called, of your bar-magnet successively up to the ends of the
  Both the poles, you find, attract both ends of the needle.
Replace the needle by a bit of annealed iron wire; the same effects
  Suspend successively little rods of lead, copper, silver,
sensible effect upon any of the substances.
special property in the case of steel and iron.
experiments, However, and you will find that some other substances,
  A rod of the
by painters is derived, exhibits powers similar to those observed with

In studying the character of the force you may, however, confine
 Make your
both ends of the needle; try both ends of the magnet.
the work dull; you are conversing with Nature, and must acquire over
impart.
from the outset.
we address Nature, and through which she sends her replies; in the use
prejudicial, as in the spoken language of the tongue.
you wish to become acquainted with the truth of Nature, you must from

Now remove your needle from its loop, and draw it from eye to point
former experiment.
attracts one end of the needle, and repels the other.
attraction observed in the first instance, is now replaced by a _dual_
  Repeat the experiment till you have thoroughly observed the

Withdraw the magnet entirely from the vicinity of your needle, and
  Shelter it as well as
coat, or a steel penknife in your pocket, beware of their action.
you work at night, beware of iron candlesticks, or of brass ones with
  Freed from such disturbances, the needle takes up a
  It sets its length nearly north and
  Draw it aside and let it go.
will again come to the same position.
magnet from a philosophical instrument maker, you will see a mark on
  Supposing, then, that you drew your needle along the
quit the magnet, you will find that the point turns to the south, the
  Make sure of this, and

Now take a second darning-needle like the first, and magnetise it in
to the north and its point to the south.
the action of the two needles which you have thus magnetised upon each

Take one of them in your hand, and leave the other suspended; bring
suspended needle retreats: it is repelled.
with the two points; you obtain the same result, the suspended needle
  Now cause the dissimilar ends to act on each other--you
  Prove
putting the other in its place.
  The
  You have
magnetism, that like poles repel, and that unlike poles attract, each
  You may say that this is all easily understood without doing;
uttered here.

several silk fibres together, so as to get sufficient strength, or
magnet.
  This
  If a
its north pole yourself, and to mark it with a file.
experiments by causing your magnetised darning-needle to attract and
  In
quit the marked end of the magnet; the point of the needle is a south
  The end which last quits the magnet is always opposed in
contact.

it, if necessary; and remember, understanding it is not sufficient:
  If you speak
  Bad
deprecated.
magnetic poles is of the utmost importance at this stage of your
implements.
than I can possibly suggest.
endeavour to follow out: questions will arise which you will try to
  The same experiment may be twenty different things to twenty
  Having witnessed the action of pole on pole, through the air,
off.
gutta-percha, but find them all pervious to this wondrous force.
magnetic pole acts upon another through these bodies as if they were
  Should you ever become a patentee for the regulation of
into the error of screening off the magnetism of the ship by the

If you wish to teach a class you must contrive that the effects which
or thirty pupils.
play.
their movements visible at a distance, denoting the north and south
  You may also improve
  Take a strip of sheet steel, heat it to
  It is thereby hardened;
  Six inches of this,
carry your paper indexes.
thus:
Magnetise a small sewing-needle and determine its poles; or, break
suspend it by a fine silk fibre.
of the darning needle, is now to be used as a test-needle, to examine
  Hold the
the lower end of your strip; one end of the test-needle is attracted,
  Raise your needle along the strip; its
middle of the strip they cease entirely; neither end of the needle is
other end being now attracted.
you thus learn that the entire lower half of the strip attracts one
end.
attracted below, you infer that the entire lower half of your
exhibits north magnetism.
distribution of magnetism in your strip of steel.

value of an experiment chiefly consists.
arises: 'What will occur if I break my strip of steel across in the
Try the experiment; break your strip of steel, and test each half as
  The mere presentation of its two ends in
magnet with a single pole--that each half possesses two poles with a
  And if you again break the half into two
exhibits precisely the same magnetic distribution as the whole strip.
You may continue the breaking process: no matter how small your
point between them.
becomes a mechanical impossibility; but does the mind stop there?  No:
it in fact; your thoughts wander amid the very atoms of your steel,
exerted by the strip of steel is the mere summation, or resultant, of

Here, then, is an exhibition of power which we can call forth at
  We magnetise our strip, of steel by
reverse its magnetism, by properly drawing it along the same pole in
  What, then, is the real nature of this
steel when the substance is magnetised?  The question leads us beyond
  This faculty,
  Not, however, an
and inspired by facts; capable of seizing firmly on a physical image
whereby these forecasts of thought may be brought to an experimental
 If such a principle be adequate to account for all the
follow, we call the assumption a theory, and, once possessing it, we
predict others which we have never seen.
prosecution of physical science, our powers of observation, memory,
  We observe facts and
memories, tries to discern their interdependence and weave them to an
  The theoretic principle flashes or slowly dawns upon
principle to its logical consequences.
dominion over natural facts; and even an assumption which can only
use in enabling us to connect and classify groups of phenomena.
theory of magnetic fluids is of this latter character, and with it we

With the view of stamping the thing more firmly on your minds, I will
  In optics, red and green are
  Now I ask
power; that red repels red, that green repels green; but that red
dissimilar colours being equal to the repulsion of the similar ones.
Imagine the two colours mixed so as to produce white, and suppose two
upon each other?  Suspend one of them freely as we suspended our
component of the strip you hold in your hand will repel the red
and, the forces being equal, they neutralise each other.
least reflection shows you that the strips will be as indifferent to
circumstances.

each strip from centre to end red, and the other half green, it is
other exactly as our two magnetised darning-needles--the red end would
and attract the red; so that, assuming two colours thus related to
unmagnetised body, while by their separation we could produce the

But you have already anticipated a defect in my conception; for if we
entirely red, and the other entirely green, and with these it would be
  How, then,
molecule of the wood_ painted green on one face and red on the opposite
  The resultant action of all the atoms would then exactly
  Here also, if the two opposite
should have, as before, perfect neutrality.

substitute in your minds two invisible self-repellent and mutually
compound, but which the act of magnetisation separates from each
molecule.
celebrated theory of magnetic fluids.
excited is supposed to be proportional to the quantity of neutral
  According to this theory nothing is actually
  The act of
existed in the steel before it was magnetised, but which then
  And if you test your
that it has lost no force--no more, indeed, than I should lose, had my
strong resolve to study natural philosophy.
gainer by my own utterance, and by the reaction of your fervour.
magnet also is the gainer by the reaction of the body which it

Look now to your excited piece of steel; figure each molecule with its
  How can this state of
what, then, keeps them apart?  Why do they not instantly rush together
meet this question philosophers have been obliged to infer the
  They
which offer most resistance to being magnetised--which require the
very ones which offer the greatest resistance to the reunion of the
  Such kinds of steel are
  It is manifest,
all possible.

among iron filings, and observed how they cling to it; or into a
  I know very well
done many things that I have not told you to do, and thus multiplied
  You are almost sure to
have probably succeeded in causing a second bit to attach itself to
too feeble to bear the weight of more.
nails, you may have observed that the points and edges hold together
to the corner of your magnet than to one of its flat surfaces.
short, you will in all likelihood have enriched your experience in

Well, the magnet attracts the nail, and the nail attracts a second
  This proves that the nail in contact with the magnet has had the
  If it be withdrawn
  Contact,
  A sheet of glass or paper, or a space of
magnetised, though not so forcibly as when in actual contact.
nail thus presented to the magnet is itself a temporary magnet.
end which is turned towards the magnetic pole has the opposite
pole has the same magnetism as the pole itself, and between the two

Conversant as you now are with the theory of magnetic fluids, you have
of an iron nail under the influence of the magnet.
iron as possessing the neutral fluid in abundance; you picture the
fluid of a like kind with itself, and attracting the unlike fluid;
polarity.

  What,
force.
cause is removed, they flow together again, and neutrality is
  Imagination must be quite nimble in picturing these
the magnet is brought near or withdrawn.
your mind, you must picture the precise arrangement of the two fluids
the minds of your pupils.
iron in various positions, and describe the exact magnetic state of
  The mere facts of magnetism will
principles whereon the facts depend.
of magnetic fluids to track out the phenomena and link them together,
symbol merely,--a symbol, moreover, which is incompetent to cover all
for the actual truth.
to diamagnetic bodies which are repelled by magnets.
such bodies are thrown into a state of temporary excitement, in virtue
repulsion by the decomposition of a fluid will demonstrate its own
]
The state of excitement into which iron is thrown by the influence, of
' More
and hence this mode of magnetising is called 'magnetic induction.
Now, there is nothing theoretically perfect in Nature: there is no
no steel so hard as not to be capable, in some degree, of magnetic
  The quality of steel is in some measure possessed by iron,
  It is in
attracted in your first experiment; and from this you may at once
repulsive action of a magnet must be always less than its attractive
  For the repulsion is opposed by the inductive action of the
inductive action.
your experiments.
due to the temporary magnetism overbalance the repulsion due to the
apparently to attract each other.
act on each other from a sufficient distance, the inductive action
equal to the attraction of unlike ones.

first importance, and it is the temptation of this age of unhealthy
  Now follow me a little farther.
examining the distribution of magnetism in your strip of steel you
a neutral point at the centre.

its centre?  Let us see.

 13, be our magnet, and let n represent a particle of
  Of
detach your north magnetism from its neighbour.
have done so, what would be the action of the two poles of the magnet
the pole N repels it.
attraction be expressed by the line n m, and the magnitude and
  Now, the particle n being
will be equal to m n, which expresses the attraction.
two such forces, the particle n must evidently move in the direction n
  Hence you see that, although
equator, there is a tendency on its part to move parallel to the
  If, instead of a particle of north magnetism, we placed a
evidently be urged along the line n q; and if, instead of two separate
both north and south magnetism, opposite the magnetic equator, its
needle will be compelled to set itself parallel to the magnet s N.
Make the experiment, and satisfy yourselves that this is a true

Substitute for your magnetic needle a bit of iron wire, devoid of
does.
magnet and behaves as such; it will turn its north pole towards p, and

But supposing you shift the position of your particle of north
other; the forces acting on the particle are no longer equal; the
than the more distant one.
 14, be the magnet, and n the
  It is repelled by
  Let the repulsion be represented in magnitude
n M.
parallelogram m n o p, and drawing its diagonal n p.
a particle of north magnetism would be urged by the simultaneous
  Substituting a particle of south magnetism for n,
would be urged along it q.
its north pole will be urged along n p, its south pole along n q, the
line p q, which is no longer parallel to the magnet.
deduction by actual experiment.

two poles as two centres from which the force emanates, we could, in
direction to the magnetic needle at every particular place.
substituting, as before, a bit of iron wire for the magnetic needle,

Now, I think, without further preface, you will be able' to comprehend
effects in the whole domain of magnetism.
particles of iron, irregular in shape, being longer in some directions
  For the present experiment, moreover, instead of the
 I
paper be stretched on a wooden frame as this enables us to keep it
  I scatter the filings, or the scraps of wire, from a
particles for a moment from its friction.
filings through the paper, and see how it arranges them!  They
technically called 'magnetic curves,' or 'lines of magnetic force.
Does the meaning of these lines yet flash upon you?  Set your magnetic
curves, and you will find the direction of the needle, or of the wire,
at that point.
needle always coincides with the direction of the curve on which it is
  These, then, are the lines along which a particle of south
bit of north magnetism to the south pole.
which the decomposition of the neutral fluid takes place.
of the magnetic needle, one of its poles being urged in one direction,
necessarily set itself as a _tangent_ to the curve.
simplify this subject further.
confused or incomplete in my statement, you ought now, by patient
confusion to order, and to supply what is needed to render the
  Do not quit the subject until you thoroughly
at the play of forces around a magnet, and see distinctly the
the time which we have spent together will not have been spent in

FIG.

In this thorough manner we must master our materials, reason upon

they widen the mind to generalisation.
brotherhood between the larger phenomena of Nature and the minute
  Why, we
is compelled to do so by the earth; the great globe which we inherit
  Let us learn a little more about it.
a bit of wax, or otherwise, attach the end of your silk fibre to the
uninterfered with by the paper loop, and will enjoy to some extent a
  Lay your
magnet.
  Move it towards the north end of
you approach the north pole, over which the needle, if free to move,
  Move it back to the centre, it
north end now dips, and directly over the south pole the needle
  Thus we
the needle dips; on the other side the south end dips, the dip varying
  If we go to the equatorial regions of the earth
the needle horizontal.
if we sail south the opposite end dips; and over the north or south
  The south
the north magnetic pole on June 1, 1831.
a complete parallelism between the action of the earth and that of an

The terrestrial magnetic poles do not coincide with the geographical
geographical equator.
which is called the magnetic meridian, encloses an angle of 24° with
the needle for London.
west of the true meridian; the declination is westerly.
1660, however, the declination was nothing, while before that time it
  All this proves that the earth's magnetic constituents
  This change is very slow:
has not yet extended over a sufficient period to enable us to guess,

Having thus discovered, to some extent, the secret of the earth's
  In the line of 'dip' I
  The earth, acting as a magnet,
separate, making the lower end of the poker a north pole, and the
  Mark the experiment: When the knob is
undermost it attracts the south end of a magnetic needle.
poker repeat this experiment and satisfy yourselves that the fluids
presented to the earth.
iron possesses a certain amount of coercive force.
moment, finds in this force an antagonist which opposes the
figured as meeting an amount of friction, or possessing an amount of
poker.
the residue of a powder from the interior surface of a glass to which
powder, and thus enable the force of gravity to pull it down.
by tapping the end of the poker we 'loosen the adhesion of the
apart.
been thus forcibly dragged over the molecules refuses to return when
has become a permanent magnet.
it again we reverse its magnetism.
will know how to place these remarkable facts before his pupils in a
 By the use of sensible
definite conceptions, purifying these conceptions afterwards, as the
  By thus
upon his pupils a profit and a joy which the mere exhibition of facts
of memory alone, could never inspire.


may find a place here: 'It is well known that a voltaic current
direction; and that when the directions are opposed to each other the
  By coiling wires into spirals,
attraction and repulsion exhibited by magnets, and from this it was
  He
currents, which, however, in the natural state of the body mutually
  The
currents parallel to each other; and, starting from this principle, he
electric currents.

from first to last, we can hardly fail to be convinced that
"the same in kind as, but the reverse in direction of, that acquired
" But if this be the case, how are we to conceive
Poisson's theory, the act of magnetisation consists in the
for example, possesses an attraction for the south fluid of a piece of
and with it the material particles with which the fluid is associated.
To account for diamagnetic phenomena this theory seems to fail
pole exciting a north pole, and a south pole a south pole," involves a
  For if the north fluid be supposed to be _attracted_
presence there could produce _repulsion_.
equally at a loss to explain diamagnetic action; for if we suppose the
to all that is known of electrodynamic laws, these currents would set
magnet, and hence attraction, and not repulsion, would be the result.
The fact, however, of this not being the case, proves that these
induction is effected.
M.
produced by molecular currents, not _directed_, but actually _excited_ in
  Such induced currents would, according to
and hence would produce the phenomena of repulsion.
assumption here made, M.
molecules of diamagnetic bodies are surrounded by channels, in which
resistance.

Ampère.
 136-7.


  ON FORCE.

1862.

theatre floor of the Royal Institution.
gravity.
elevation; and the instant before it touched the floor, it had a
  That is to say, if at that instant the
proceed through space at the uniform velocity of 32 feet a second.

upward in opposition to gravity, then, to reach a height of 16 feet it
  This velocity
means, would carry it to the precise height from which we saw it fall.

work performed.
weight might be carried up to a height of 16 feet; or it might be
be suddenly jerked up to a height of 16 feet.
in all these cases, as far as the raising of the weight is concerned,
  The work done at one and the same
depends solely upon two things; on the quantity of matter lifted, and
  If we call the quantity or mass
product of m into h, or mh, expresses, or is proportional to, the

Supposing, instead of imparting a velocity of 32 feet a second we
  To what height will the
but this would be quite incorrect.
it would reach a height of four times 16, or 64 feet.
treble the starting velocity, the weight would reach nine times the
the height.
starting, the weight would attain an elevation of 256 feet.
seven-fold velocity at starting, the weight would rise to 49 times the

Now the work done--or, as it is sometimes called, the _mechanical
proportional to the height, and as a double velocity gives four times
perfectly plain that the mechanical effect increases as the square of
  If the mass of the body be represented by the letter m,
or represented by m v2.
weight to be cast upward, being opposed in its flight by the
sent into water, mud, earth, timber, or other resisting material.
for example, we double the velocity of a cannon-ball, we quadruple its
  Hence the importance of augmenting the velocity of
using a large charge of powder in his recent striking experiments.

multiplied by the square of its velocity.

is often found hot.
 Fairbairn informs me that in the experiments
daylight, when the ball strikes the target.
examined after it has fallen from a height it is also found heated.
Now here experiment and reasoning lead us to the remarkable law that,
proportional to the product of the mass into the square of the
  Double your mass, other things being equal, and you double
equal, and you quadruple your amount of heat.
common mechanical motion destroyed and heat produced.
bow is drawn across a string, the sound produced is due to motion
been expended.
of the arm is converted into music.
arrested motion of our descending weight, or of the cannon-ball, is
  The mode of motion changes, but motion still
atoms of the mass; and these small motions, communicated to the

We know the amount of heat which a given amount of mechanical force
  Our lead ball, for example, in falling to the earth
three-fifths of a Fahrenheit degree.
velocity of 32 feet a second, and forty times this velocity would be
6 by the square of 40, we find
if wholly concentrated in the lead, raise its temperature 960 degrees.
This would be more than sufficient to fuse the lead.
however, the heat developed is divided between the lead and the body
attention to this point, and to ascertain whether rifle bullets do
 [Footnote: Eight
  In the
impinging on bones.

pass to the motion of atoms towards each other by chemical affinity.
collodion balloon filled with a mixture of chlorine and hydrogen being
mirror 20 feet distant a strong electric light was suddenly generated;
within it exploded, hydrochloric acid being the result.
virtually fell together, the amount of heat produced showing the
  The burning of charcoal in oxygen is
to have; we now regard the act of combination on the part of the atoms
against the earth.
common cause.
light, glows and burns in consequence of the falling of the atoms of
  And could we measure the velocity of the atoms
multiplying the weight of each atom by the square of its velocity, and
amount of heat developed by the union of the oxygen and carbon.

sensible masses and of atoms.
these atoms or masses, and heat is developed.
process daily, and by the expenditure of heat execute work.
raise a weight by heat; and in this agent we possess an enormous store
  A pound of coal produces by its combination with
to raise a weight of 100 lbs.
earth's surface.
 falling from a height of 20
heat equal to that developed by the combustion of a pound of coal.
Wherever work is done by heat, heat disappears.
ball is less heated than one which fires blank cartridge.
quantity of heat communicated to the boiler of a working steam-engine
of the steam, after it had done its work; and the amount of work
 Mr.
Smyth informed us in his interesting discourse, that we dig annually
  The amount of mechanical

in a minute, would be equivalent to the work of 300 horses; and if we
strength, for a year, their united energies would enable them to
produce of our coal-fields would be able to accomplish.

unite together, chemical affinity seems almost infinite.
give gravity fair play by permitting it to act throughout its entire
  Place a body at such a distance from the earth that the
earth from this distance.
velocity of 36,747 feet a second; and on collision with the earth the
combustion of an equal weight of coal.
through a space of 16 feet our lead bullet would be heated
has already used up 1,299,999 parts out of 1,300,000 of the earth's
this space only 1/1,300,000 of the whole force is exerted.


 Pouillet have informed us
calculation we ascertain the precise amount of the expenditure which
  Out of 2300 million parts of light
  The whole heat emitted by the sun in
ice-cold water.
sun's heat derived, and by what means is it maintained?  No
be competent to produce the temperature of the sun's surface.
Besides, were the sun a burning body merely, its light and heat would
  Supposing it to be a solid globe of coal,
  In this
  What agency then can produce the
case of a body falling from a great distance towards the earth, and
produced by the combustion of an equal weight of coal.
greater must be the heat developed by a body falling against the sun!
miles in a second; the maximum velocity with which it can strike the
  And as the heat developed by the
asteroid falling into the sun with the above velocity would generate
an asteroid of coal of the same weight.

that they may be raining down upon the sun?  The meteorites flashing
attraction.
friction against the air they are raised to incandescence and caused
  At certain seasons of the year they shower
  In Boston 240,000 of them were
  There is no reason to suppose that the
is, on the contrary, reason to believe that space is stocked with
  That
astronomers as the Zodiacal light, is probably a crowd of meteors; and
approach the sun.
and this would constitute a source from which the annual loss of heat
  The sun, according to this hypothesis, would
into the sun, it would develope an amount of heat sufficient to cover
century's loss would be made good.
distributed over the surface of the sun, would utterly vanish from
  Indeed, the quantity of matter competent to produce the
appreciable augmentation in the sun's magnitude.
the sun's attractive force would be more sensible.
hypothesis may fare as a representant of what is going on in nature,
thermo-dynamic principles.


sufficient to raise the temperature of a globe of lead of the same
  It
'
that motion, and the greater part, if not the whole, of our planet
  If the earth fell into the sun, the
by the combustion of a mass of solid coal 6435 times the earth in

There is one other consideration connected with the permanence of our

the Thames reversed, and the water poured upward twice a-day.
water thus moved rubs against the river's bed, and heat is the
  The heat thus generated is in part
  What
  Let us look a
  Imagine the moon fixed, and the

meridian; that mountain is, as it were, laid hold of by the moon; it
round.
mountain would be in the opposite direction, it would tend to diminish
the action of all fixed bodies on the earth's surface is neutralised.
But suppose the mountain to lie always to the east of the moon's
rotation, the velocity of which would be diminished in a degree
  _The tidal wave occupies
 The
of the earth; and as a brake they must diminish the velocity of the
 [Footnote: Kant surmised an action of this kind.
Supposing then that we turn a mill by the action of the tide, and
origin totally different from the heat produced by another mill which
  The former is produced at the expense
radiation.

moisture of our air, which when it condenses falls in the form of
  In this solid form it is

permits it to roll by gravity to the sea.
every river in the world as it rolls towards the ocean, is drawn from
  No streamlet glides to a lower level without
power of the sun.
same power.

connection with which is not so obvious.
upon the earth, and when burned they give rise to heat, and hence to
  Whence is this power derived?  You see this oxide
oxygen; you cannot see this transparent carbonic acid gas, formed by
  The atoms thus in close
wind up the weight and prepare it for another fall, and so these atoms

carbon of the plant is derived; and the solar beam is the agent which
carbon to aggregate in woody fibre.
surface of sand; the sand is heated, and finally radiates away as much
quantity of heat given back is less than the forest receives; for the

and an amount of sunlight is consumed exactly equivalent to the
  Thus trees are formed; thus the cotton on which
 Bazley discoursed last Friday is produced.
and it flames; the oxygen again unites with the carbon; but an amount
sun to form that bit of cotton.

mediate or immediate, of all animal life.
from its oxygen and builds the vegetable; the animal consumes the
producing animal heat.
winding up; the process of building an animal is one of running down.
The warmth of our bodies, and every mechanical energy which we exert,

The fight of a pair of pugilists, the motion of an army, or the
all cases of mechanical energy drawn from the sun.
pounds has 64 pounds of muscle; but these, when dried, reduce
  Doing an ordinary day's work, for eighty
  Special organs
example, if entirely unsustained, would be oxidised in about a week.
Take the amount of heat due to the direct oxidation of a given weight
food in the working animal frame, and the missing quantity is the

I might extend these considerations; the work, indeed, is done to my
  To
this evening's discourse?  They are the work of a man of whom you have
Mayer.
physician in Heilbronn, this man was the first to raise the conception
his own mind.
scientific men his merits are but partially known.
beautiful researches, and quite independent of Mayer, Mr.
published in 1843 his first paper on the 'Mechanical Value of Heat;'
heat from data which only a man of the rarest penetration could turn

In 1845 he published his memoir on 'Organic Motion,' and applied the
vital processes.
chain of conservation.
 Waterston proposed, independently,
Thomson applied his admirable mathematical powers to the development
in a masterly manner by Mayer, and all that I have said about it has
  When we consider the circumstances of Mayer's
with astonishment at what he has accomplished.
genius working in silence, animated solely by a love of his subject,
lives were entirely devoted to Natural Philosophy.
accident of bleeding a feverish patient at Java in 1840 that led Mayer
  He noticed that the venous blood in
reasoning on this fact led him into the laboratory of natural forces,
  Well, you
  His mind, it is
sent to a lunatic asylum.
it is stated that he died there, but this is incorrect.
and, I believe, is at this moment a cultivator of vineyards in

====================
June 20, 1862.

wished to make myself acquainted with all that Dr.
connection with this subject.
who above all others seemed likely to give me the information which I
 [Footnote: Helmholtz and Clausius.
and both particularly distinguished in connection with the Dynamical
  Each of them kindly furnished me with the list of
order them from a bookseller, and to send them to me.
his reply to my first letter regarding Mayer, stated his belief that I
before forwarding the memoirs to me he read them himself.
accompanying them contains the following words: 'I must here retract
of importance in Mayer's writings: I am astonished at the multitude of
point out various important subjects, in the treatment of which Mayer
  My other friend, in whose own
containing these references were translated some years ago by myself,
beautiful essay of Mayer's, entitled 'Beitraege zur Dynamik des
striking a manner the meteoric theory of the sun's heat, he was
recent article in 'Macmillan's Magazine' I infer that he is now aware
  Mayer's physiological writings have been referred to by
 Carpenter, for example--in terms of honouring
  We have hitherto, indeed, obtained fragmentary glimpses
his total merit has never yet been recognised as it assuredly would
  I do not think
overstate his claims: such overstatement is sure to recoil to the
  But when Mayer's
think that I shall be deeply blamed for attempting to place him in

Here, however, are the titles of Mayer's papers, the perusal of which
regarding their author.
Natur,' Liebig's 'Annalen,' 1842, Vol.
 231; 'Die Organische
1845; 'Beitraege zur Dynamik des Himmels,' Heilbronn, 1848;
1851.


--Dr.
1878, aged 63 years.
positionwhich he will for ever occupy in the annals of science was
  He was
Sciences; and he received from the Royal Society the Copley medal-its
 [Footnote: See 'The Copley Medalist for 1871,' p.
]
====================
November 1878.

to say, more than fourteen years after its delivery and
personal attack by Professor Tait.
uncourteous vent dates from 1863, when it fell to my lot to maintain,
in 1862 I had assigned to Dr.
 [Footnote: See 'Philosophical
]  In those days Professor
never missed an opportunity, however small, of carping at Mayer's
  The action of the Academy of Sciences and of the Royal Society
lifetime, never vouchsafed either remonstrance or reply.

'Recent Advances in Physical Science,' which I have reason to know has
expressed.
their rejection and condemnation of the historic portions of this
  In March last it was subjected to a brief but pungent critique
of Sciences in Berlin.
Feeling,' and his critique is thus wound up: 'The author of the
history on which he professes to throw light, and on the later phases
  He thus
his other writings--that the fiery Celtic blood of his country
scientific Chauvin.
secretary, 'from which German investigators have hitherto kept free,
as self-control (_sittliche Haltung_) is more to be expected from men of
' [Footnote: Festrede,
the birthday of the Emperor and King, March 28, 1878.

disappointment.
accept the writings of Professor Tait as representative of the thought
  Surely no nation in the world has more effectually shaken
  From the day that Davy, on
spurious patriotism which would run national boundaries through the
principle with the Royal Society.

consider it necessary to say a word.


  CONTRIBUTIONS TO MOLECULAR PHYSICS.

1864--supplementing, though of prior date, the Rede Lecture on
]
HAVING on previous occasions dwelt upon the enormous differences which
and emitting radiant heat, I have now to consider the effect of a
  When a gas is condensed to a liquid, or a
each other by forces which are insensible as long as the gaseous state
  But, even in the solid and liquid conditions, the
of radiation and absorption depend on them individually, regardless of
state ought not materially to affect the radiant and absorbent power.
If, on the contrary, the mutual entanglement of the molecular by the
liquids will exhibit a deportment towards radiant heat altogether

The first part of an enquiry conducted in 1863-64 was devoted to an
  Twelve different liquids
from 0.
27 of an inch.
not in glass vessels, which would have materially modified the
slightly affected the radiation.
comparative experiments consisted of a platinum wire, raised to
  The
liquids at the respective thicknesses were first determined.
vapours of these liquids were subsequently examined, the quantities of
liquid previously traversed by the radiant heat.
for heat from the same source, the order of absorption of liquids and
  There is no known
as an absorber or a radiator, it is only necessary to determine the

This result proves that the state of aggregation, as far at all events
moment--a conclusion which will probably prove to be of cardinal
  On one important and contested point
  If the position of a liquid as an absorber
that of aqueous vapour.
a multitude of experiments, and it has been found, both as a radiant
  Thus, for example, a
02 of an inch in thickness absorbs 6
platinum spiral to pass through it; benzol absorbs 43 and transmits 57
  of the same radiation; alcohol absorbs 67 and transmits 33
head of all liquids except one.
  A layer of
permits only 19 per cent.
 Had no
vigorous action upon radiant heat might be inferred from the

The relation of absorption and radiation to the chemical constitution

radiant and absorbent powers augment as the number of atoms in the
  Thus, bisulphide of carbon has 3 atoms,
their respective molecules.
absorbents is that here indicated, bisulphide of carbon being the
  Alcohol, however,
molecule; but, on the other hand, its molecule is rendered more
  Benzol contains carbon

radiation--atomic _complexity_ must also be taken into account.
recommend to the particular attention of chemists the molecule of
perfectly anomalous, if the chemical formula at present ascribed to it

Sir William Herschel made the important discovery that, beyond the
power exist which are incompetent to excite vision.
capable of extension.
a solution is obtained which entirely intercepts the light of the most
iodine is found to be perfectly diathermic.
bisulphide, which is highly pervious to invisible heat, exercises on
  A hollow
beam from an electric lamp, the light-spectrum is completely
there examined.
presence is shown by the prompt deflection of even a coarse

What, then, is the physical meaning of opacity and transparency as
differ from the invisible ones simply in period.
light is excited by waves of aether shorter and more quickly recurrent
  But why
answer to this question no doubt is, that the intercepted waves are
oscillation possible to the atoms of the dissolved iodine.
elastic forces which keep these atoms apart compel them to vibrate in
the aethereal waves, the latter are absorbed.
transparency in liquids, as well as in gases, is synonymous with
of the waves of aether and those of the molecules on which they

According to this view transparent and colourless substances owe their
periods of their atoms and those of the waves of the whole visible
  From the prevalence of transparency in compound bodies, the
light-giving waves of the spectrum, may be inferred; while their
opacity to the ultra-red rays.
striking manner.
proves that its atoms do not readily oscillate in the periods which
  It is highly opaque to the ultra-red undulations,
the longer waves.

eminently or perfectly opaque, we may infer that the atoms whence the
  Let us apply this
  This flame consists
calculated by Bunsen, is 3259°C, so that, if the penetrative power of
its source, we may expect the radiation from this flame to be
  While, however, a layer of the
07 of an inch in thickness transmits 72 per
  of the incident radiation, and while every other liquid
above thickness is entirely opaque to the radiation from the hydrogen
  Thus we establish accord between the periods of the atoms of
 But
those of the hydrogen flame must be sensibly ultra-red also.
absorption by dry air of the heat emitted by a platinum spiral raised
ordinary undried air is 6 per cent.
spiral a hydrogen flame, the absorption by dry air still remains
  of
  The temperature of the hydrogen flame is, as
  Suppose,
  to 3259°C,
increase of amplitude or width of swing, and not to the introduction

The part played by aqueous vapour in the economy of nature is far more
  To nourish the vegetation
our atmosphere; and to such rays aqueous vapour is eminently
  The violet and the ultra-violet rays pass through it
  To protect vegetation from destructive chills the
space; and this is accomplished by the aqueous vapour diffused through
  This substance is the great moderator of the earth's
contrasts between day and night which would render life insupportable.
But we can advance beyond this general statement, now that we know the
water, and, reciprocally, the radiation from water by aqueous vapour;
which produces the condensation of aqueous vapour at the surface of
surface--imparts to terrestrial radiation that particular character
losing itself in space.

present moment occupies attention.
ultra-violet rays of the spectrum to fall upon sulphate of quinine and
rays.
other end of the spectrum--to convert the ultra-red periods into
 Such
 Miller in believing, occurs when
  In this common
ones--a true rendering of unvisual periods visual.
refrangibility here effected differs from that of Professor Stokes;
refrangibility to a higher; and, secondly, in the circumstance that
vapour, before their heat has assumed the radiant form.
be doubted that the same effect would be produced by radiant heat of
sufficiently intense.
accomplished.
]  The
struck by a particle of aqueous vapour oscillating at a certain rate,

By plunging a platinum wire into a hydrogen flame we cause it to glow,
  These, as
hence we may infer that the transmission through water will be

  Water, from being
  of the radiation from the
  A thin plate of colourless glass, moreover, transmits 68 per
  of the radiation from the hydrogen flame; but when the flame
  of the heat is transmitted.

transparent than for the same flame with a platinum spiral immersed in
general--that black glass and black mica were decidedly more
 Melloni did
 The mica and glass
  This carbon,
ultra-red rays, and I have myself succeeded in transmitting between 40
 of the radiation from a hydrogen flame through a
flame.
aqueous vapour, the heat of which is almost wholly ultra-red.
this radiation, then, the carbon is in a considerable degree
in a great measure opaque.
augmented the radiation through the pure glass, augmented the

No more striking or instructive illustration of the influence of
a carbonic oxide flame.
acid; and on the radiation from this flame even the ordinary carbonic
 A quantity of the
polished brass tube four feet long, intercepts 50 per cent.
radiation from the carbonic oxide flame.
lampblack, olefiant gas is a far more powerful absorber than carbonic
most feeble absorber to be found among the compound gases.
for the radiation from a hydrogen flame olefiant gas possesses twice
carbonic oxide flame, at a common pressure of one inch of mercury, the

temperature of 20°C.
3000°C, the periods of oscillation of both the incandescent and the

It will be seen from the foregoing remarks and experiments how
simple on the transmission of radiant heat if different sources of
 Throughout such an examination the same oscillating
 This is done by beating a platinum spiral
widest possible limits.
rays shows the general accord of the oscillating periods of the
the ultra-red undulations.
from darkness up to whiteness, we ought gradually to augment the
transmission.
 Formic
 of the radiation from a
 of the
 of the
 when the
 Remarkable cases of
 For barely visible redness
both are equally transparent; while, for a white heat, and still more

substances to the luminiferous aether.
shorter period the sulphuric aether augments most rapidly in opacity;
of the formic.
oscillate, on the whole, more slowly than those of sulphuric aether.

filled with boiling water, the opacity of formic aether in comparison
 With this source also the positions of
 For a white-hot spiral,
of methyl is 16; with the blackened cube as source, the absorption by
19.
a platinum wire, heated to the temperature of boiling water, is
absorber.
heated lampblack an emission takes place which synchronises in an
  For the cube at 100' C, coated with
by bisulphide of carbon; for the radiation from the most luminous
considerably in excess of that by bisulphide of carbon; while, for the
particles are removed by the free admixture of air, the absorption by
  _The removal
the chloroform_.
of the same flame, it was found that for the blue base of the flame
the flame the chloroform was most opaque.
very small gas flame, consisting of a blue base and a small white tip,
exceeded that of the chloroform when the source of heat was the flame
  Comparing the radiation from a Leslie's cube
lampblack, at the common temperature of 100°C, it was found that, out
isinglass most powerfully; the single exception was chloroform.

position of a vapour as an absorber of radiant heat was altered, the
similar change.

whether radiant heat, up to a temperature of 100°C, is monochromatic
  Some affirm this; some deny it.
enables me to state that probably no two substances at a temperature
  emit heat of the same quality.
isinglass, for example, is different from that emitted by lampblack,
  It is
to all kinds of calorific rays; the differences affirmed to exist by
incidence from the various sources employed.
 de la Provostaye
 Knoblauch
  I tested this point without changing anything
surroundings remaining the same.
be coloured thermally.
radiation from a barely visible spiral than to that from a white-hot

In regard to the relation of radiation to conduction, if we define
motion from the vibrating atoms to the aether, we may, I think, by
ought to prove the worst conductors.
subject shows at once the general harmony of this conclusion with
  Organic substances are all excellent radiators; they
  The moment we pass from the metals
bad radiators to good ones.
worst conductor; it is the best radiator.
the best conductor; it is the worst radiator.
researches of MM.
illustration of what I am inclined to regard as a natural law--that
aether, or, in other words, radiate most powerfully, are the least
propagate by conduction readily.


  LIFE, AND LETTERS OF FARADAY.


UNDERTAKEN and executed in a reverent and loving spirit, the work of
 Bence Jones makes Faraday the virtual writer of his own life.
Everybody now knows the story of the philosopher's birth; that his
he ran along the London pavements, a bright-eyed errand boy, with a
arm; that the lad's master was a bookseller and bookbinder--a kindly
him his apprentice without fee; that during his apprenticeship he
books he stitched and covered.
his year of legal manhood, when he appears in the volumes before us as
tone of mind.
 Abbott, a member of the
greatness, preserved his letters and produced them at the proper time.

which he jotted down in pencil his thoughts and memoranda.
his notes in the laboratory, in the theatre, and in the streets.
distrust of his memory reveals itself in his first letter to Abbot.
a proposition that no new enquiry should be started between them

reason: ideas and thoughts spring up in my mind which are irrevocably
' Gentle as he seemed, he wished
  Differences
resolutely faced each other.
with joy, and shall in the battle of experience cause not pain, but, I
' Faraday notes his own impetuosity, and incessantly
  There is at times something almost mechanical in his
  In another nature it would have hardened into mere
this in his case.
him at last, and lent serenity to his later years.

 De la Roche as a journeyman
  His master appears to
degree sensitive.
  He suffered at times
  'At
would not scruple to speak a truth to any human being, whatever
  Being in this state of mind, I
general tenor of your letters that your mind is, at proper times,
frivolous.
not only crucifies the affections and lusts of him who harbours it,

About three months after his engagement with De la Roche, Faraday
  He had heard Davy, copied his
which he hated, and enabled to pursue Science.
merit of his correspondent, kept his eye upon him, and, when occasion
of assistant in the laboratory of the Royal Institution.
engaged March 1, 1813, and on the 8th we find him extracting the sugar
  He joined the City Philosophical Society which had
 Tatum in 1808.
the remarks very plain, and the results most valuable.
derived great profit from this little association.
he had a discipline sturdier still.
this time frequently cut and bruised by explosions of chloride of
  One explosion was so rapid 'as to blow my hand open, tear
them easily.
to pieces, I got a cut on the head, and Sir Humphry a bruise on his
' And again speaking of the same substance, he says, 'when put in
a fearful noise.
  and I had masks on, but I escaped this
 Sir H.
and a violent blow on the forehead struck through a considerable
' It was this same substance that blew

Over and over again, even at this early date, we can discern the
Faraday a great experimental philosopher.
facts, and not to rest contented with the descriptions of them.
frequently pits the eye against the ear, and affirms the enormous
  Late in life I have heard him say
it.
  He aspired to be a
exposition.
collected, undaunted and unconcerned:' still 'his whole behaviour
'  These recommendations were
  I doubt his
  It used to
along with it.
subject hopelessly unintelligible, he suddenly evoked a certain
bewildered followers, he would dash alone through the jungle into
exhibition of a vigour which, for the time being, they could neither

In October 1813 he quitted England with Sir Humphry and Lady Davy.
During his absence he kept a journal, from which copious and
 Bence Jones.
considerate, preferring at times to be his own servant rather than
  But Lady Davy was the
  She treated him as an underling; he chafed under the
  They halted
  De la Rive, the elder, had known Davy in 1799, and, by his
the English chemist's labours known abroad.
country residence in 1814.
out shooting together.
while De la Rive charged his own.
himself by the side of Faraday, and in his frank and genial way
  It was evident that a
could be no mere servant.
to find that the _soi-disant domestique_ was really _préparateur_ in the
Faraday thenceforth should join the masters instead of the servants at
  To this Davy, probably out of weak deference to his
thenceforward should have his food in his own room.
that a dinner in honour of Faraday was given by De la Rive.
delusion; there was no such banquet; but Faraday never forgot the
laboratoire_.
effects of a fall in the Alps, my friends, with a kindness I can never
pleasant to me.
 de la Rive then wrote out for me the full account,
  It was at the desire
 Bence Jones that I asked him to do so.
at Geneva illustrates the tendency to substitute for the youth of 1814
]
He returned in 1815 to the Royal Institution.
years; he worked also for himself, and lectured frequently at the City
  He took lessons in elocution, happily without
  He
advanced.
  In those early lectures we hear
who is not in a state of transition.
difficult and requires more caution than philosophical deduction, nor
opinion.
that he united flexibility with his strength.
with this intellectual expansiveness was his fixity in religion, but

Of all the letters published in these volumes none possess a greater
  Here, as Dr.
truly remarks, 'he laid open all his mind and the whole of his
one by its loveliness, its truthfulness, and its earnestness.
and he sometimes swerved into wordplay about love; but up to 1820, or
  Faraday's journal
assertion of his contempt for love; but these very entries became
  It was through them that he became acquainted
life.
moods which preceded his acceptance.
alternations of light and gloom; at one moment he wishes that his
intoxicated with hope.
unchastened by the discipline to which it was subjected in after
  The very strength of his passion proved for a time a bar to
Barnard, doubts of her capability to return it with adequate force.
But they met again and again, and at each successive meeting he found
moment's alloy of this evening's happiness occurred.
delightful to the last moment of my stay with my companion, because
' The turbulence of doubt subsided, and a calm and
  'What can I call myself,' he
affection and love for you?  Can I or can truth say more than that for
fairer light falls upon his character than that which reveals his
  Never, I believe, existed a manlier, purer,
  Like a burning diamond, it continued to shed, for

Faraday was married on June 12, 1821; and up to this date Davy appears
  Soon afterwards, however, disunion occurred
pain.
this subject has been treated by Dr.
facts known to him, but not appearing in these volumes, which justify

excellent article in the March number of 'Framer's Magazine.
best analysis I can make of the data fails to present Davy in this
  The facts, as I regard them, are briefly these.

connects electricity with magnetism, and immediately afterwards the
to rotate round its own axis under the influence of a magnetic pole.
In 1821 'he tried, but failed, to realise this result in the
  Faraday was not present at the
conversation of Wollaston and Davy about the experiment.
heard a rumour of a wager that Dr.

This was in April.
history of electro-magnetism, and repeated for himself the experiments
  It was while thus instructing himself that he
round a magnetic pole.
but it was closely related to that result.

actions of natural forces gave birth to his greatest discoveries; and
Wollaston not preceded him, the result would have been the same.
in judging Davy we ought to transport ourselves to his time, and
life, which would render simply impossible the ascription to Faraday
  It would be unjust to Davy to put our knowledge
have possessed.
with these supposed interactions between magnets and currents.
therefore, Faraday in October published his successful experiment,
criticism followed.
experiment was not that of Wollaston, and secondly, Faraday, before he
at home, did not feel himself authorised to mention his name.

from which, through a misapprehension, the name of Wollaston was also
  Warburton and others thereupon affirmed that Wollaston's
that Wollaston himself, though cautious in his utterance, was also
  Censure grew till it became intolerable.
Faraday to his friend Stodart, 'every day more and more of these
aloud among scientific men.
defences, but he went straighter to the point.
principals face to face--to plead his cause before them personally.
There was a certain vehemence in his desire to do this.
Wollaston, he saw Davy, he saw Warburton; and I am inclined to think
these viva voce defences revealed, as much as the defences themselves,

As regards Davy, another cause of dissension arose in 1823.
spring of that year Faraday analysed the hydrate of chlorine, a
to be a compound of that element and water.
over by Davy, who then and there suggested to Faraday to heat the
  This was done, the substance was
Faraday to be chlorine liquefied by its own pressure.
its discovery he communicated this result to Dr.
  Davy, on

the matter in Faraday's hands?  I think he ought.
his relation to both Faraday and the hydrate of chlorine, Davy, I
  A father is not
estrangement on this account is not rare; nor was Davy wise enough to
discoverer.
  But had
life been devoted to money-getting, instead of to research, would
  Why
a parallel: his glory was without a cloud.
discoveries that of Faraday, and after having been his teacher for
to hear that you are comfortable at the Royal Institution, and I trust
but also for science.
or actual.
to which, and not to any ignobler motive, Davy's opposition to the
ascribed.

consideration, in the volumes of Dr.
they are not always so handled.
associations is surrounded by injurious rumours which I would
  The pupil's magnitude, and the splendour
humiliation of his master.
however, could never have become brothers in feeling; their characters
  Davy loved the pomp and circumstance of fame;
  They
  But with Davy pride projected itself into the
inward force.
  Each of them
neither of them did so.
delight of discovery, constituted their reward.
reverence which great gifts greatly exercised ought to inspire.
were both ours; and through the coming centuries England will be able

====================
The first volume of the 'Life and Letters' reveals to us the youth who
  Skilful, aspiring, resolute, he grew
  Consciously or unconsciously, the
  It
planted in him more daring ideas of a similar kind.
could be evoked by electricity, and he thought that electricity, in
  On August
  He had been
instincts directing him towards the truth.
worker, might at times miss the outward object, but he always gained
  Of this Faraday's life was
  By November he had discovered and colligated
  He had
transitory; and he afterwards generated currents by the earth itself.
Arago's 'Magnetism of Rotation,' which had for years offered itself
into his hands.
illustration of the great principle of Magneto-electric Induction.
Nothing equal to this latter, in the way of pure experimental enquiry,

Electricities from various sources were next examined, and their
  He thus assured himself of
  He then took up Conduction, and gave many

derived an income of many thousands a year, he poured his whole
  He was long entangled in
  The light of law was for a time obscured by the
researches with the great principle of Definite Electro-chemical
  If his discovery of Magneto-electricity
almost stand beside that of Definite Combining Proportions in
  He passed on to Static Electricity--its Conduction,
  He discovered and illustrated the
himself how electrical attractions and repulsions are transmitted.
they, like gravity, actions at a distance, or do they require a
lines; if the latter, then, like sound or light, they may turn a
  Faraday held--and his views are gaining ground--that his
operation of a medium.
profound and philosophic character of his leading thought.
In a very remarkable paper published in Poggendorff's 'Annalen' for
Molecular Induction.
the papers here referred to.

be made solely by the aid of mathematics; that we had our data, and
  Statements of a similar character
  They arise from an imperfect
vastness of the field of physical enquiry.
science doubtless is to bring all physical phenomena under the
mathematical expression.
asymptotic; and for ages to come--possibly for all the ages of the
experimenter and the mathematician.
against the foregoing statement by labelling his investigations
' They were completed in 1854,
  For the sake of
 In
title, 'Experimental Researches in Chemistry and Physics.
this apostle of experiment illustrate its power, and magnify his

The second volume of the Researches embraces memoirs on the
Pile; on the Electricity evolved by the Friction of Water and Steam,
Hydro-electric machine are described and developed; a paper on
controversy it aroused.
here, is that on the Source of Power in the Voltaic Pile.
Contact Theory, pure and simple, was totally overthrown, and the
demonstrated.

Magnetisation of Light,' and the Illumination of Magnetic Lines of
' It is difficult even now to affix a definite meaning to this
which it announced, seems pregnant with great results.
of William Thomson on the theoretic aspects of the discovery; the
models of experimental completeness and skill; Weber's labours in
researches of Clerk Maxwell on the Electro-magnetic Theory of
vehicle of light and radiant heat, as the probable basis also of
  The hope of such a connection was
 [Footnote: A letter
following reference to the connection here mentioned: 'Die Hoffnung
Drehung er Polarisationsebene durch magnetische Directionskraft
Geschwindigkeit, welche das Verhaeltniss der electro-dynamischen
des Lichts angeregt worden; und mir scheint von allen Versuchen,
Herrn Maxwell gemachte am erfolgreichsten.
cling with particular affection to this discovery.
was more in it than he was able to unfold.
grow in meaning with the growth of science.
is doing now.
scientific history.

repulsion of matter by a magnet.
repelled a magnetic needle.
  Le Bailliff proved that
  Here he stopped.
others, also touched the discovery.
a momentary curiosity and were almost forgotten, when Faraday
made them the inlets to a new and vast region of research.
of a discovery is to be measured by the intellectual action it calls
scientific truth as give occupation to some of the best intellects of

The salient quality of Faraday's scientific character reveals itself
patience--the one prompting the attack, the other holding him on to
  Certainty in one sense
  The right method of
rather than on the system, and the mark is missed when Faraday's
inductive philosophy.
but without the energy and insight which this man possessed, and which
level of his achievements.
rather than of philosophic method; the energy of a strong soul
between it and Nature.

historic treasury as regards Faraday's work and character, and his
  It contains letters from Humboldt,
Oersted, Plucker, Du Bois Reymond, Lord Melbourne, Prince Louis
  I notice with particular
addressed to him by Faraday, but which he had permission to open if he
  The packet referred to one of the many unfulfilled hopes

marching with assured step to further conquests; and be certain that
rise, and will speedily swell into a shout of triumph, astounding even
  F.
  Herschel.

  The
  He had newly fashioned and
the greatest importance.
  With the
Commissioners, appointed by the Academy of Sciences to examine the
  At length he published his researches in the 'Annales de
' They thus fell into the hands of Faraday, who, discerning at
Medal of the Royal Society.
medal; and the pecuniary help was, at this time, even more essential
  Melloni's gratitude was

société à laquelle je n'avais rien offert, vous qui me connaissiez à
ou puissants, ni calculé quel en était le nombre; mais vous avez parlé
tant de bienveillance, et vos paroles ont été accueillies
des hommes dignes de leur noble mission, les véritable représentants
'
Within the prescribed limits of this article it would be impossible to
carve from it more than the merest fragments of his character.
letters, written to Lord Melbourne and others in 1836, regarding his
  The Prime
given was complete.
very full account of this transaction given by Dr.
motives and influences were at work which even now are not entirely
  The minister was bitterly attacked, but he bore the censure
  Faraday, while he disavowed having
did not publicly exonerate the Premier.
  Caroline Fox had
the breach between the philosopher and the minister.
thought that Faraday ought to have come forward in Lord Melbourne's
him on the subject.
reticence, but they are to me unknown.

his wife and brother-in-law.
accomplished feats of walking respectable even for a trained
  The published extracts from his Swiss journal contain
  Amid references to the tints
towering over the Lake of Thun, we come upon the charming little scrap
considerably, and is a very neat and pretty operation to observe.
love a smith's shop and anything relating to smithery.
a smith.
to somebody--perhaps to the world.

of sky and mountain, are all fine and sympathetic.
and in reference to it all, he tells his sister that 'true enjoyment
' In those days Agassiz was living
  Faraday met Forbes
Neufchâtelois'; but indisposition put the project out.

him by Prince Louis Napoleon Bonaparte.
many years ago, and the desire, shown in various ways by the French
it since.
'rendering his captivity less sad by studying the great discoveries'
his cast of thought at the time: 'What is the most simple combination
setting fire to powder under water or under ground?' Should the
best appliances of modern science; while we, I fear, shall have to
pangs of actual war.
with astonishing effect, by those who had studied it far more
  We also, I am happy to
[1878].

published in the second volume.
man appears more distinctly than anywhere else.


IN QUIET.
way only serve to make me esteem that happiness the more.


now returned to my room to talk with you, as the pleasantest and
  Nothing rests me so much as communion
  I feel it even now as I write, and catch myself saying the
'
Take this, moreover, as indicative of his love for Nature:
'After writing, I walk out in the evening hand in hand with my dear
have seen or can see, there is none surpasses that of heaven.
glorious sunset brings with it a thousand thoughts that delight me.

some fall upon his religion.
describes himself as belonging to 'a very small and despised sect of
founded on the faith that is in Christ.
at all necessary to tie the study of the natural sciences and religion
is religious, and that which is philosophical, have ever been two
' He saw clearly the danger of quitting his moorings,
  For
sceptical questionings, thus shielding from the assaults of
  His religion was constitutional
  It was implied in the eddies of his blood and in the
have changed, Faraday would still have possessed its elemental

It is worth enquiring how so profoundly religious a mind, and so great
subject of education.
alive.
be accompanied by dogma.
Philosophical Society in 1818, when he was twenty-six years of age,
end of his life.
considerations are banished from the society, and of course from my
to the means which are to be adopted in this world in anticipation of
  Next, I have no intention of substituting anything for religion,
it.
habits of society, are independent of religion, and may exist either
  They are always the same, and can dwell alike in
set of principles they include in the term religion, or in those who

'To discriminate more closely, if possible, I will observe that we
this evening is that part of man which we have a right to judge.
I think it will be found on examination, that this humanity--as it may
being in our own hands so improvable and perfectible.

dinners with Faraday: 'At two o'clock he came down for me.
niece, and myself, formed the party, "I never give dinners," he said.
"I don't know how to give dinners, and I never dine out.
not like my friends to attribute this to a wrong cause.
for the sake of securing time for work, and not through religious
"  He said grace.
call his prayer a "saying Of grace.
might be described as the petition of a son, into whose heart God had
blessing from his father.
and potatoes; drank sherry, talked of research and its requirements,
society.
now sixty-two.
warms and elevates the heart.
  I love
tenderness, and sweetness, in the character of Faraday.

character, are well brought out by the wise choice of letters and
  I will not call the
  So great a character will challenge
  In the coming time some sympathetic spirit, with the
render these materials plastic, give them more perfect organic form,
Faraday's life.
biographer, 'for me to estimate rightly, and too great a philosopher
' That may be: but the reverent
the materials here placed before us, is probably a surer guide than
  The task of the artist who may wish in future
beauty, and childlike simplicity of him whom we have lost, will find
 Bence Jones's

********************
XIX.

THIRTY years ago Electro-magnetism was looked to as a motive power,
  In centres of industry, such
numerous.

 James Prescot Joule, a resident of Manchester, took
'Annals of Electricity' between 1839 and 1841, described various
engines.
 Joule pursued these enquiries is
says, 'to communicate any new arrangement in order, if possible, to
most interesting subject merely in the light of pecuniary
' He was naturally led to investigate the laws of
principle that the attractive force exerted by two electromagnets, or
proportional to the square of the strength of the magnetising current;
of a permanent steel magnet, varies simply as the strength of the
  These investigations were conducted independently of, though
and Lenz and Jacobi, on the same subject.

 Joule communicated to the Royal Society a
  In it he
transmitted electricity are proportional to the resistance overcome by
character of the metal which closes the circuit; and also proportional
  This is a
  In another paper, presented to, but
experiments, and materially extended it.
on the heat consequent on the passage of Voltaic electricity through
proper action of any Voltaic current is proportional to the square of
conduction which it experiences.
conclusions of the highest importance to electrochemistry.

sagacity and originality, that the great idea of establishing
assumed definite form in his mind.
 Joule read before the
  paper' On the Calorific
'
it was written it must have appeared hopelessly entangled.
should think, was the reason why Faraday advised Mr.
submit the paper to the Royal Society.
summed up in these memorable words by its author, written some time
the mechanical power exerted in turning a magneto-electric machine is
induction through its coils; and, on the other hand, that the motive
heat due to the chemical reaction of the battery by which it is
' [Footnote: Phil.
 May, 1845.
upon the weight and importance of this statement.

is not surprising that the 'mechanical values of heat,' deduced from
from each other.
foot-pounds, for 1 degree Fahr.

One noteworthy result of his enquiries, which was pointed out at the
 Joule, had reference to the exceedingly small fraction of

engaged in Germany upon the same question, had moved independently in
future occasion.
]  In the memoir now
 Joule also announced that he had proved heat to be
deduced from these experiments an equivalent of 770 foot-pounds, a
  A detached statement
illustrates the penetration of Mr.
principles, at the period now referred to.
him Haller's hypothesis, that animal heat might arise from the
  'It is
 Joule,'  that heat is produced by such
in the friction is a part of the force of affinity which causes the
system must still be referred to the chemical changes.
animal were engaged in turning a piece of machinery, or in ascending a
forth for the purpose, a _diminution_ of the heat evolved in the system
' The italics in this


The concluding paragraph of this British Association paper equally
chemical and latent heat.
that when two atoms combine together, the heat evolved is exactly that
chemical action taking place, and is therefore proportional to the
  I now
attraction of affinity, but rather the mechanical force expended by
intensity of the current, and, consequently, the quantity of heat
why heat is evolved so freely in the combination of gases, and by
prepared for action, as a watch-spring is when wound up.
the sake of illustration, that 8 lbs.
  of hydrogen
the heat evolved would be about 1 degree Fahr.
 of
equal to a weight of about 50,000,000 lbs.
foot.
in a liquid state, the heat of combination would be less than before,
'  No
molecular physics, in their relation to the mechanical theory of heat,

Perfectly assured of the importance of the principle which his
 Joule did not rest content with
  He
experiments on the thermal changes produced in air during its
secondly, against no pressure, and therefore performing no work.
thus established anew the relation between the heat consumed and the
  From five different series of experiments he deduced five
greater than that attained in his first experiments.
was 802 foot-pounds.
paddle-wheel, he deduced, in 1845, an equivalent of 890 foot-pounds.
In 1847 he again operated upon water and sperm-oil, agitated them by a
mechanical power which produced it.
equivalent of 781.
1
  The mean of these two very close determinations is 781.
foot-pounds.

 Joule

in 1849 a series of 40 experiments on the friction of water, 50
friction of plates of cast-iron.
our present mechanical equivalent of heat, justly recognised all over
'
There are labours so great and so pregnant in consequences, that they
  Such are
 Joule.
of a principle of incalculable moment, not only to the practice, but
  Since the days of Newton,
 Joule is the

I have omitted all reference to the numerous minor papers with which
 Joule has enriched scientific literature.
the important investigations which he has conducted jointly with Sir
  But sufficient, I think, has been here said to show
 Joule the highest honour of the Royal
one which had been fairly earned twenty years previously.
Lord Beaconsfield has recently honoured himself and England by
 Joule.


  THE COPLEY MEDALIST OF 1871.

 JULIUS ROBERT MAYER was educated for D the medical profession.
the summer of 1840, as he himself informs us, he was at Java, and
singularly bright red colour.
he reasoned upon it, and came to the conclusion that the brightness of
sufficed to keep up the temperature of the body in a hot climate than
  The darkness of the venous blood he regarded as the

It would be trivial to remark that accidents such as this, appealing

heat.

combustion, is that under all circumstances the same amount of fuel
law holds good even for vital processes; and that hence the living
generate heat out of nothing.

can also generate heat outside of itself.
by hammering can heat a nail, and a savage by friction can warm wood
  Now, unless we give up the physiological
driven,' says Mayer, 'to the conclusion that it is the total heat
calorific effect of the matter oxidised in the body.

stand in a fixed relation to the work expended in its production.
supposing the organic processes to remain the same; if it were
different amounts of heat by the same amount of work, it would follow
yield a less, sometimes a greater, quantity of heat.
Mayer, 'that a fixed relation subsists between heat and work, is a
'
This is the simple and natural account, given subsequently by Mayer

between work and heat, it was: inevitable that Mayer should seek to
  It was also inevitable that a mind like his,
forward to consider the relationship of natural forces generally.
the beginning of 1842 his work had made considerable progress; but he
profession limited the time which he could devote to purely scientific
  He thought it wise, therefore, to secure himself against
publish in his 'Annalen' a brief preliminary notice of the work then
  Liebig did so, and Dr.
in the May number of the 'Annalen' for 1842.

processes of the living body; but his first step in public was to
deductions were to rest.
inorganic nature.
which are not mutually convertible;--the different kinds of matter and
  The first quality of both he affirms to
  A force cannot become nothing, nor can it arise
  Forces are convertible but not destructible.
terminology of his time, he then gives clear expression to the ideas
resting upon the earth, suspended at a height above the earth, and
  He next fixes his attention on cases
on the shock of inelastic bodies, for example.
the vanished motion maintain itself?  Experiment alone, says Mayer,
  He warms water by stirring it; he refers to the
  Motion in both cases
equivalent of the motion destroyed.
with extraordinary sagacity, 'may be compared to distilling apparatus:
is again deposited as heat in the axles and wheels.

Mayer aimed at, and towards the end of his first paper he makes the
  It was known that a definite amount of air, in rising one
  If
be kept constant it takes up a different amount.
are called the specific heat under constant volume and under constant
  The ratio of the first to the second is as 1: 1.
  No
 Mayer, penetrated the significance
  He first saw that the excess 0.
then universally supposed, heat actually lodged in the gas, but heat
pressure.
amount of heat consumed was also accurately known, and from these data
  Even in this
between the theoretic power of the fuel consumed in steam-engines, and

Though this paper contains but the germ of his further labours, I
of heat, this obscure Heilbronn physician, in the year 1842, was in

Having, by the publication of this paper, secured himself against what
to his studies, and in 1845 published a memoir which far transcends
the history of science.
'Remarks on the Forces of Inorganic Nature.
great essay was, 'Organic Motion in its Connection with Nutrition.
it he expands and illustrates the physical principles laid down in his

He goes fully through the calculation of the mechanical equivalent of
  He calculates the performances of steam-engines, and finds that
 of coal, in a good working engine, produce only the same
 in an unworking one; the 5 missing lbs.
having been converted into work.
gunpowder, and finds nine per cent.
charcoal invested on the moving ball.
heat generated in water agitated by the pulping engine of a paper
horse-power.
combination--the union of atoms with the union of falling bodies with
  He calculates the velocity with which a body starting at
the heat generated by its collision would raise an equal weight of
  in temperature.
effect which would be produced by the earth itself falling into the
  So that here, in 1845, we have the germ of that meteoric theory
ability three years afterwards.
exclusive efficacy of the sun's heat in producing mechanical motions
developed by friction in the wheels of our wind and water mills comes
by mills driven by tidal action is generated at the expense of the

Having thus, with firm step, passed through the powers of inorganic
phenomena of vegetable and animal life.
whence come their heat, and the work producible by that heat?  From
  Nature has proposed to herself
and of casting into a permanent form the most fugitive of all powers.
To this end she has overspread the earth with organisms which, while
forces of another kind.
  The vegetable
the sun is changed into the rigid form of chemical tension, and thus
  With this prevision, as shall subsequently
connected.
being anticipated by vague statements regarding the 'stimulus' of
' He first saw the full
solar rays, and gave that observation its proper place in the doctrine
  In the leaves of a tree, the carbon and oxygen of
asunder at the expense of the sun, and the amount of power thus
  The
withdrawn from the sun of former ages.
of the notions regarding 'vital force' which were prevalent when he
  With the plain fact before us that in the absence of the solar
tensions, it is, he contends, incredible that these tensions should be
  Such an hypothesis
unbridled phantasy.

state, as an axiomatic truth, that during vital processes the
'
Having cleared his way through the vegetable world, as he had
organic kingdom.
property of animals.
reunite with the atmospheric oxygen.
and not only animal heat, but animal motion.
indistinctness about Mayer here; he grasps his subject in all its
 A
  ball a velocity of 30 feet, consumes
  A man weighing 150 lbs,
grain of carbon.
consumption of the same man would be 2 oz.
  50 grs.

the food of horses when actively working, and Liebig had determined
  Employing the mechanical
the additional food to be amply sufficient to cover the increased

But he does not content himself with showing, in a general way, that
mechanical work.
body consumed, and in doing so executes some noteworthy calculations.
The muscles of a labourer 150 lbs.
perfectly desiccated they fall to 15 lbs.
corresponding to that labourer's work exerted on the muscles alone,
  The heart furnishes a
  Were the oxidation necessary to sustain
consumed in 8 days.
ventricles, their action would be sufficient to consume the associated
5 days.
his own way, is Mayer's pregnant conclusion from these calculations:
the force is effected; but it is not the substance consumed in the
' He calls the blood 'the oil of
in the furnace of the capillaries, is sacrificed to produce animal
  This was Mayer's conclusion twenty-six years ago.
complete opposition to the scientific conclusions of his time; but

Thus, in baldest outline, I have sought to give some notion of the
  The second half is so
  I
of the nerves upon the muscles.
finger in opening a valve or loosing a detent, can liberate an amount
so the nerves, acting upon the muscles, can unlock an amount of
themselves.

physiology, Dr.
living men.

illustrating it and applying it in the most diverse domains.
as we have seen, with physical principles; he determined the numerical
of the vegetable world, and showed the relationship of the heat of our
 He followed the energies which were potential in
  But in
  He then,
generated by gravity where the force has sufficient distance to act
  He proved, as I have before stated, the heat of collision of
sufficient to raise the temperature of a quantity of water, equal to
  He also found, in 1845, that
generate an amount of heat equal to that obtainable from the
  With
produce the enormous temperature of the sun, and also to account for
  Mayer shows the utter
the solar temperature.
would be utterly consumed in 5,000 years.
attending the assumption that the sun is a cooling body; for,
temperature would fall 15,000' in 5,000 years.
that the light and heat of the sun are maintained by the constant
  I never ventured an opinion as to the
fought out.
genius with which Mayer followed the mechanical theory of heat through
  Whether the meteoric theory be a matter of fact
the light and heat of suns and stars may be originated and maintained

It is the man who with the scantiest data could accomplish all this in
arduous profession, that the Royal Society, in 1871, crowned with its

Comparing this brief history with that of the Copley Medalist of 1870,
similar natural cast and endowment, comes out in an instructive
  Withdrawn from mechanical appliances, Mayer fell back upon
data, the single result on which could be founded a calculation of the
  In the midst of mechanical appliances,
which has secured for the mechanical theory the acceptance it now
  A great portion of Joule's time was occupied in actual
into its most abstruse and impressive applications.
reversed, however, Joule might have become Mayer, and Mayer might have

It does not lie within the scope of these brief articles to enter upon
Mayer executed their memorable labours.


  DEATH BY LIGHTNING.

that an impression upon the nerves--a blow, for example, or the prick
  But this is not the
  The seat of sensation being the brain, to it the intelligence
this impression can become manifest as consciousness.
transmission, moreover, requires time, and the consequence is, that a
more tardily appreciated than one inflicted adjacent to the brain.
an extremely ingenious experimental arrangement, Helmholtz has
be about eighty feet a second, or less than one-thirteenth of the
  If therefore, a whale forty feet long were
a second after the wound had been inflicted.
admirable lecture on the velocity of nervous transmission has been
 Du Bois Reymond in the 'Proceedings of the Royal
 iv.
 575.
ingredient in the delay.
act of consciousness belongs a determinate molecular arrangement of
in that organ; and nothing can be more certain than that every
its accomplishment.
still further time is necessary for the brain to put itself in
to the completion of consciousness.
one-tenth of a second is demanded for this purpose.
of the whale above supposed, we have first half a second consumed in
head, one-tenth of a second consumed by the brain in completing the
transmission through the motor be the same as that through the sensor
itself.
made upon its caudal nerves could be responded to by a whale forty

Now, it is quite conceivable that an injury might be inflicted so
arrangements necessary to consciousness, its power of arrangement
  In such a case, though the injury might be of a
case would be simply the sudden negation of life, without any

The time required for a rifle-bullet to pass clean through a man's
  Here,
painless.
that of the rifle-bullet.
appearing and disappearing in less than a hundred-thousandth of a
single second over a distance almost equal to that which separates the
  It is well known that a luminous impression once made
is the reason why we see a continuous band of light when a glowing
  A body illuminated by
after the flash has become extinct; and if the body thus illuminated
upon it.
caused to spin rapidly the colours blend together.
rotating in a dark room and illuminated by an electric spark, appears
  Professor Dove
  During
found that every flash revealed the top as a motionless object with
  If illuminated solely by a flash of lightning,
remarked, appear suspended.
its flight apparently arrested, and would seem to hang motionless in
remained upon the eye.

without the interposition of sensation, much more is a flash of
  Accordingly, we have
who, on recovery, had no memory of pain.
case is described by Hemmer:
On June 30, 1788, a soldier in the neighbourhood of Mannheim, being
had previously taken shelter.
branches were thick enough to afford the required protection, and, in

struck down.
nothing about what had occurred, save the fact of his looking up at
  This was his last act of consciousness, and he passed
  The
hair is sometimes burnt; slight wounds are observed; while, in some
skin.

exceedingly unpleasant to me.
the presence of a numerous audience, with a battery of fifteen large
  Through some awkwardness on my part, I
through my body.
interval, without a trace of pain.
returned; I vaguely discerned the audience and apparatus, and, by the
received the battery discharge.
position was restored with exceeding rapidity, but not so the optical
  To prevent the audience from being alarmed, I observed
and that my wish had at length been fulfilled.
remark, the appearance which my body presented to my eyes was that of
  The arms, for example, were detached
  In fact, memory and
nerve was restored to healthy action.
dwell upon here is, the absolute painlessness of the shock; and there
lightning, the passage from life to death occurs without consciousness
  It is an abrupt stoppage of

********************
XXII.
'
THEIR refusal to investigate 'spiritual phenomena' is often urged as a
  I here propose to give a sketch of
are found available in dealing with natural truth.

country, Faraday was invited, or rather entreated, by one of his
  He had, however, already made
  I had not been so
invitation to me.
and I was conducted to the place at the day and hour appointed.


not evident to the spiritualists themselves, might underlie their
  Extraordinary effects are produced by the
  Galileo set a heavy pendulum in
  Ellicot set one clock
by a wall.
extraordinary degree, the testimony of even veracious persons.
my desire to witness those extraordinary phenomena, the existence of
had witnessed and described them.
residence in the neighbourhood of London.
wife, and a gentleman who may be called X, were in the house when I
  I was informed that the 'medium' had not yet made her
  It
before her arrival, in order to be assured that there was no trickery
  This was done; and I then first learned that my

one of the accidents of the occasion.

have suffered much from ill health.
close beside her.
of very wonderful narratives supplying their place.
belief on the testimony of witnesses was frequently insisted on.

things.
influence ran from his shoulder downwards, and impelled him to write
  I listened for a time, offering no observation.
'And now,' continued X, 'this power has so risen as to reveal to me
  Only this morning I told a friend what he was
' Here, I
  I said immediately
your principles to the world from the housetop, tell me what I am now
'  X.

Some time previously I had visited Baron Reichenbach, in Vienna, and I
of the curious things which he describes--the light emitted by
extracted from my notes, written on the day following the séance.

--'Oh, yes; but I see light around all bodies.


--'Yes; I see luminous atmospheres round all people.
atmosphere which surrounds Mr.
 C.
light.

--'You are aware of the effects ascribed by Baron Reichenbach to

--'Yes; but a magnet makes me terribly ill.

--'Am I to understand that, if this room were perfectly dark, you
the fact?'
Medium.
'
I.

--'I should be rendered instantly ill.

--'How do you feel to-day?'
Medium.
'
I.
magnet in my possession?'
The young lady looked at me, blushed, and stammered, 'No; I am not en
'
I sat at her right hand, and a left-hand pocket, within six inches of

Our host here deprecated discussion, as it 'exhausted the medium.
wonderful narratives were resumed; but I had narratives of my own
  These spirits, indeed, seemed clumsy creations,
  I
 A
as beautiful colours when she closed her eyes.
able to see similar colours, and, more than that, to be able to see
  The medium affirmed that she could see
  I retorted that men of
also their exact length.
spirits on musical instruments.
gross, in comparison with a kind of music which had been discovered
  Standing at a distance of
melodious note; it would obey, and continue its song for hours.
loud was the music emitted by the gas-flame, that it might be heard by
  These were acknowledged to be as
  The spirits were then

During this conversation a low knocking was heard from time to time
  These, I was told, were the spirits' knocks.
informed that one knock, in answer to a question, meant 'No;' that two
'
In answer to a question whether I was a medium, the response was three
  I noticed that the knocks issued from a
enough to answer from another corner of the table.
comply; but I was assured that they would do it, and much more,
  The knocks continuing, I turned a wine-glass upside down,
  The spirits seemed
recover it for a considerable time.

chair and gazed listlessly out of the window.
table was rudely pushed.
oscillating in the glasses, and I was asked whether that was not
  I readily granted the fact of motion, and began to feel
  There were several pairs of arms upon
offence, to express the conviction which I really entertained?  To
rested my ear upon it.
hair, on touching it, caused it to vibrate, and produce a peculiar
  A perfectly candid and warm-hearted old gentleman at
the sound, and expressed his entire belief that it was spiritual.
however, informed him that it was the moving hair acting on the glass.
The explanation was not well received; and X, in a tone of severe

was a very different one.

  The strength
  No

attempted, three times.
withdrawn from it; on a third occasion, I tried whether the act could
  Grasping the table
with eyes fixed on vacancy, for the pull.
  For some seconds
the table remained at rest.
fact is known only to the particular spirit in question and myself.

long rendered me familiar, was employed to figure the changes and
  The spirits, it was alleged, were
each other, and considerable ingenuity was shown in demonstrating the
  A
afterwards my attention was drawn to a scarcely sensible vibration on
  Several persons were leaning on the table at
  'Oh! I
  Throwing one leg across the other, I
vibration of the free leg.
communicated to the floor, and thence to the chairs of all present.
therefore intentionally promoted it.
to the motion; and a gentleman beside me, whose value as a witness I
out of the compass of human power to produce so strange a tremor.
believe,' he added, earnestly, 'that it is entirely the spirits'
'  'So do I,' added, with heat, the candid and warmhearted old
  'Why, sir,' he continued, 'I feel them at this moment
' I stopped the motion of the leg.

' I began again, and A.
their presence.
present, who did not quite know what to think of the manifestations.
saw their perplexity; and, as there was sufficient reason to believe
it to myself.

became animated.
appeared to brighten towards its close.
spell the name by which I was known in the heavenly world.
commenced repeating the alphabet, and when he reached the letter 'P' a
  He began again, and the spirits knocked at the
'  I was puzzled, but waited for the end.
knocked down was 'E.
going to make a poet of me.
that the frame of mind proper for the occasion ought to have been

 But
  Our host continued his repetition of the
' Here was
their most communicative mood.
but no person present evinced the slightest desire to look under it.
asked whether I might go underneath; the permission was granted; so I
  Some tittered; but the candid old A.
exclaimed, 'He has a right to look into the very dregs of it, to
' Having pretty well assured myself that no sound
requested our host to continued his questions.
vain.
had become dumb dogs, and refused to be entreated.
that table for at least a quarter of an hour, after which, with a
experienced, I regained my chair.
their loquacity, and dubbed me 'Poet of Science.

look into these spiritual phenomena.
this reason.
themselves into two classes, one of which needs no demonstration,
  The victims like to
  Science is perfectly
  It is, moreover, a
capacity for devising hypotheses which only require the hardihood
them impregnable.
sufficiently borne in mind.
not by logic but by, slowly rendering the mental soil unfit for its
  When science appeals to uniform experience, the
will continue uniform?  You tell me that the sun has risen for six
the next twelve hours it may be puffed out by the Almighty.
this ground, a man may maintain the story of 'Jack and the Beanstalk'
  You urge, in vain, that
possess, while spiritualism has added nothing to that knowledge.
drugged soul is beyond the reach of reason.
impostors are exposed, and the special demon cast out.
slightly to change his shape, return to his house, and find it 'empty,
'
*****
Since the time when the foregoing remarks were written I have been
  They do
  Surely no baser delusion ever obtained

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.










BY
JOHN TYNDALL, F.
S.





VOL.

LONDON:
LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.


All rights reserved.


in the all-encircling firmament an embracer;
the storm they felt the presence of a shouter and of furious strikers;
--MAX MULLER.

*****

  REFLECTIONS ON PRAYER AND NATURAL LAW.


AMID the apparent confusion and caprice of natural phenomena, which
seemed hopeless to seek for law or orderly relation; and before the
inexplicable effects were referred to personal agency.
a cataract the savage saw the leap of a spirit, and the echoed

sacrifice was offered to the demons of earth and air.

structural efforts of the intellect which have emotion for their base.
One by one natural phenomena came to be associated with their
with the economy of nature retreating more and more.
this change.
suspicion and dislike on any philosophy, the apparent tendency of
  Probably every change from ancient savagery
fears of this kind.
whether its present form is necessary to the life and warmth of
  We may err in linking the imperishable with the
which it clings.
to mark a tendency.
nature--ceased even to pray for things in manifest contradiction to
  In Protestant countries, at least, I think it is

At an auberge near the foot of the Rhone glacier, I met, in the summer
including a bottle of wine, informed me that he had come up to 'bless
' This was the annual custom of the place.
the Highest was entreated, by official intercessors, to make such
flocks and herds of the Valaisians.
deepening of the river's bed, would, at the time I now mention, have
  But
open a new channel for the river, or to cause a portion of it to flow

Creator to perform miracles, but to do something which he manifestly

recital.
his prayer different in kind from a request to open a new river-cut,

In a similar manner the same Protestant gentleman would doubtless
of a glacier dam, offered the sacrifice of the Mass upon the ice as a
  That poor man did not expect to
enable it to withstand the pressure of the water; nor did he expect
and relieve him, by a miracle, of its presence.
boundaries of his knowledge lay a region where rain was generated, he
  He was not so presumptuous as to expect a miracle, but
arranged, without trespass on the miraculous, that the stream which
proper bounds.

their respective wants and wishes.
into play, uncontrolled by a knowledge of law.
mind was long prevalent among mechanicians.
were to be reckoned men of consummate skill, were occupied a century
  They aimed at constructing
and some of them went mad in the pursuit of this object.
such a consummation, involving, as it did, immense personal profit to
this faith was met by bitter resentment on the part of those who held
  Gradually, however, as men became more and more acquainted with
  The hope of
still there remained for the speculator a cloud-land denser than that
he still hoped to evolve perpetual motion.
of chemic force, which nobody understood; there were heat and light,

']  Here,
  A modified and
a remnant of sanguine designers may at the present moment be engaged

And why should a perpetual motion, even under modern conditions, be
great generalisation of modern science, which is known under the name
  This principle asserts that no power
some other power; that natural agents are so related to each other as
  Light
magnetism into mechanical force; and mechanical force again into light
  The Proteus changes, but he is ever the same; and his
expression, not of spontaneity, but of physical necessity.
perpetual motion, then, is deemed impossible, because it demands the
creation, but infinite conversion.

planet.
are unknown.
Italian wind, gliding over the crest of the Matterhorn, is as firmly
the fall of its vapour into clouds is exactly as much a matter of
  The dispersion, therefore, of
much a miracle as the rolling of the Rhone over the Grimsel

It seems to me quite beyond the present power of science to
valley, asked for an 'impossibility' in praying for good weather; but
which limited their prayers to this narrow ground; and she may lessen
sometimes pray for the performance of a miracle when we do not intend
  She does assert, for example, that without a disturbance of
rolling of the river Niagara up the Falls, no act of humiliation,
towards us a single beam of the sun.

nature, may, with perfect consistency, join in our periodic prayers
miracles is past, will, if they be consistent, refuse to join in these
  And these latter, if they wish to fall back upon such a
are in perfect accordance with the doctrine of the Master himself,
affected by moral or religious causes.
the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the
' Granting 'the power of Free Will in man,' so strongly claimed
miracles, and assuming the efficacy of free prayer to produce changes
or less at the mercy of man's volition, and no conclusion founded on

It is a wholesome sign for England that she numbers among her clergy
up to their knowledge.
encouraging a manly and intelligent conflict with the real causes of
aid.

could hardly, without such preparation, be wrought without violence.
Iron is strong; still, water in crystallising will shiver an iron
safety.
speculation by a rigid envelope, hoping thereby to restrain it, but in
  In England, thanks to men of the
changes of aggregation, and the envelope slowly alters its form, in

*****
The proximate origin of the foregoing slight article, and probably the
  Some years ago, a
appointed by the proper religious authorities; but certain clergymen
declined to join in the services of the day.
nonconformity they were severely censured by some of their brethren.
Rightly or wrongly, my sympathies were on the side of these men; and,
the foregoing chapter in a little book entitled 'Mountaineering in
'  Some time subsequently I received from a gentleman of great
perfect orthodoxy in the religious one, a note directing my attention
'Pall Mall Gazette.
fair answer to the remarks made by me in 1861.
the temper and ability of the article, but I could not deem its
Mall Gazette' I ventured to state so much.
very able replies, and a second leading article was also devoted to
  In answer to all, I risked the publication of a second
editor, the discussion was closed.

directions.
were written, while a copious correspondence occupied the pages of
  It gave me sincere pleasure to
coarseness had the upper hand, was conducted with a minimum of
  The severity shown was hardly more than sufficient to
to permit that earnestness to contract itself to bigotry or to clothe
  It was probably the memory of this discussion which
exceedingly able work which in the next article I have endeavoured to

Mr.
be taken as the type.
matters, fairly tracing what is difficult, fairly trying to grapple,
with what really at bottom is the knot of it.
reasoning of which may not satisfy everyone.
.
book for people who wish to see a great subject handled on a scale
  It is a
mind applying itself, without shrinking or holding back, without trick
his antagonist, to the strength of an adverse and powerful
--Times, Tuesday, June 5, 1866.

and in the arrangement; that the matter is as solid and as logical as
passages, of which we have scarcely been able even to give a sample.
No future arguer against miracles can afford to pass it
--SATURDAY REVIEW, September 15, 1866.



[Footnote: Fortnightly Review, New Series, vol.
 p.
]
1867.

religious men, with whom I converse frankly upon theological subjects,
regarding their tenets, and hearing in return these notions and
  I have thus far found them liberal
reconcile the duties of courtesy with the earnestness of debate.
one of these, nearly a year ago, I received a note, recommending
which the question of miracles is treated by Mr.
  Previous to
through an able and elaborate review of it in the 'Times.
combined effect of the letter and the review was to make the book the
  There, during the wet and
of rest interpolated between days of toil, I made myself more
 Mozley's volume.
strong--an intellectual tonic, as bracing and pleasant to my mind as
  From time to time I
up into a coherent whole.
complete carrying out of this intention, and what I wrote last summer
render my defence of scientific method more complete.

 Mozley refers at the outset of his task to the movement against
choice of a subject.
great share in the production of this movement.
miracles, he says, does not arise from any minute knowledge of the
obvious order of nature which everybody sees.
is, he thinks, to be ascribed to the greater earnestness and
  Formerly miracles were accepted
'historic imagination' is a characteristic of our own time.
now accustomed to place before themselves vivid images of historic
astounding occurrence, and, realising it with the same clearness as if
have taken place?' In some instances the effort to answer this
strengthening of belief.
 Mozley's lectures is to show
follow from the examination of the facts.

miracles within the scope of the order of nature, but all such
 Mozley as utterly futile and wide of the
 Regarding miracles as a necessary accompaniment of a revelation,
deviation from the order of nature.
illustrate a power higher than nature, a 'personal will;' and they
high.
to demand belief, even were his assertions regarding his Divine
  Nor is it by miracles alone that the
  The material universe is
'  Under these two heads Mr.
Mozley distributes the total preternatural.
preternatural may shade into the other, as one colour passes into
specially providential from the miraculous cannot be sharply drawn,
providence can only excite surmise more or less probable, it is 'the
Divine design.

 Mozley adduces various illustrations of what he regards to be
  'The death of
death of a heresiarch taking place when it was peculiarly advantageous
.
 was not such as to compel the inference
because it carried a reasonable appearance of it.
Thundering Legion was a special providence, but not a miracle, for
rain, in answer to prayer, carried some appearance, but not proof, of
'
The eminent lecturer's remarks on this head brought to my recollection
read with avidity when a boy.
stories, if I remember right, was 'The Providence of God asserted,'
and ascribed to prayer, while equally wonderful instances of calamity
  In such
Samuel Hick, which, as it illustrates a whole class of special
mention here.
flour was lacking to make the sacramental bread.
and a windmill was present, but there was no wind to grind the corn.
With faith undoubting, Samuel Hick prayed to the Lord of the winds:

a strong appearance of an immediate exertion of Divine energy, lacks
  For the wind _might_ have
 Hence
agency.
 Mozley considers that 'the appearance of
according to what account of it we adopt.
appearance in the shape of a cross it gave some token of preternatural
'
In the Catholic canton of Switzerland where I now write, and still
containing offerings of all kinds, in acknowledgment of special
wood, according as worldly possessions enabled the grateful heart to
  Most of these offerings are made to the
  They are recognitions of 'special providences,' wrought
  Mr.
belief, that of the Methodist chronicler, and that of the Tyrolese
  Each of them assumes that
cause and effect, is mediately ruled by the free human will.
regards _direct_ action upon natural phenomena, man's wish and will, as
trigger which liberates the Divine power, and to this extent, if the

Did the existence of this belief depend solely upon the material

of natural phenomena is unaffected by the merits or the demerits of
Ottery St.
were engaged in a midnight brawl.
human mind is not due to outward verification, but to the inner
  It
various forms.
Protestantism--they are not even limited to Christianity.
refined, they are certainly not less strong in the heart of the
 Mozley.
Indeed, those feelings belong to the primal powers of man's nature.
'sceptic' may have them.
Moslem.
Indian; and raise all of them, as they raise the Christian, upon a

The character, then, of a miracle, as distinguished from a special
the latter we have only surmise.
the alleged fact passes from the one class of 'the preternatural into
  In other words, if a special providence could be proved to
become a miracle.

  A special providence is a doubtful miracle.
Why, then, not call it so?  The term employed by Mr.
negative suggestion, whereas the negation of certainty is the peculiar
  There is an
providence what his own definition makes it to be.
speaking of it as a doubtful miracle, he calls it 'an invisible
' He speaks of the point of contact of supernatural power with
out of sight, whereas the essence of a special providence is the


soon be fatal to the special providence, considered as a means of
  The term employed, on the contrary, invites and

This inner trust, though at first rejected by Mr.
external proof, is subsequently called upon to do momentous duty in
  Whenever the evidence of the miraculous seems
when the fact is so amazing that hardly any evidence is sufficient to
 Mozley invokes 'the affections.
reason to accept the conclusion, from which unaided it recoils.
affections and emotions are eminently the court of appeal in matters
submit, the court in which to weigh allegations regarding the
  These must be judged by the dry light
cases where moral elevation, and not historic conviction, is the aim.
It is, moreover, because the result, in the case under consideration,
 If
other way.
dangerous doctrine.
avoid a certain n result--can so warp the mind as to destroy its
  I have known men to work for years under
fatal influence.
enough.
 Mozley,
  From that hour their
they never reached truth.
mind, this incongruous mixture of proof and trust be fraught with
  Mr.
Mozley addresses?  In calling upon this agency he acts the part of
  It is a monster thus evoked that we see stalking

moral sense, to kindle the fire of religion in the soul, let the
colour our reports, or to influence our acceptance of reports of
  Testimony as to natural facts is
earnest subjective truth being thus rendered perfectly compatible with

There are questions in judging of which the affections or sympathies
of these.
Mr.
certificate of character.
the perfect goodness of Christ.
says, 'however irreproachable, could prove His perfect sinlessness,
the inward motive is not proved by the outward act.
miracle is an outward act, and to pass from it to the inner motive
ordinary methods of estimating men.
congruity between the outward goodness and the inner life, but there
  The
 Mozley is not the test of
the test of Jesus: 'By their fruits ye shall know them: do men gather
another: 'If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be
' For my own part, I prefer the attitude of Fichte to that
 Mozley.
thinker, knows no other God than the True God, in whom we all are, and
Nothingness.
appeals, in support of this truth, not to reasoning, but to the inward
this inward testimony, "If any man will do the will of Him who sent
"'
Accepting Mr.
evident that, in the demonstration of moral goodness, the _quantity_ of
  Had Christ, for example, limited
short of the performance of Jannes and Jambres; for it is a smaller
into a living serpent.
not good.
 Mozley's test be a true one, a point must
goodness, while on the other side it does not.
contrary flexure' to be determined?  It must lie somewhere between the
diabolical to the Divine.
out of a purely _quantitative_ difference in the visible manifestation
extremely difficult to see.
reptile; Jannes and Jambres produced a small one.
the intellectual faculty which would enable me to infer, from those
in the highest recorded manifestations of the miraculous I am equally
  Let us not play fast and loose with the miraculous; either
  If Mr.
Mozley accepts Christ's goodness as transcendent, because He did such
works of those who, in His name, had cast out devils, as demonstrating
  But it is people of this
and his angels.
 Mozley for miracles tends, I
  The logical threatens to stifles the
  The truly religious soul needs no miraculous proof of the
 The words addressed to Matthew at the receipt of
  It was by no stroke
backward and fall to the ground.
effluence from within, which needed no prodigy to commend it to the

As regards the function of miracles in the founding of a religion, Mr.
Mozley institutes a comparison between the religion of Christ and that
not profess to adduce miracles in proof of its supernatural origin.
But the religion of Mahomet, notwithstanding this drawback, has
populations than Christianity itself.
Christianity are, however, brought forward by Mr.
permanent, enormous, and incalculable practical result' of Christian
the miraculous.

towards the production of which several elements may contribute, to
effective cause.
we exclude heat, but the phenomenon remains: hence, heat is not its
  Magnetism is associated with a phenomenon; we exclude
cause.
religion--whether it be due to miracles, or to the spiritual force of
unchanged, we infer that miracles are not the effective cause.
important experiment Mahometanism has made for us.
spread without miracles; and to assert, in the face of this, that
both to the spirit of science and the common sense of mankind.

been dwelt upon above; in another particular also the strain put by
 Mozley upon miracles is, I think, more than they can bear.
consistency with his principles, it is difficult to see how he is to
Divine nature.
argument from experience,' in the demolition of which he takes obvious
  He destroys the argument, and repeats it, for the mere
 Experience,
project experience a hair's-breadth beyond the point it has at any
  It appears to me that
superhuman energy, Mr.
condemnation.
miracles of the New Testament illustrate Divine power?  May they not
something impossible to man.
of the New Testament are impossible to man?  Seek as he may, he has
accomplished such things.
the dead prove that he _can_ never raise the dead?  'Assuredly not,'
 Mozley's reply; 'for this would be pushing experience
' Then
  If this be
 Mozley can avoid the concession--it
miracles.
future; as a mighty tidal wave leaves high upon the beach a mark which
  Turn the matter as
conclusion that Christ's miracles demonstrate Divine power, than an
 Mozley as a 'rope of

The learned Bampton Lecturer would be in this position, even had he

therefore worse.
  Why does he
is he sure that it is not even fraud?  He will answer, that the
the bearers of this message to mankind sealed it with their blood.
Granted with all my heart; but whence the value of all this?  Is it
sacrifice their lives in the attestation of that which they know to be
depend ultimately upon our experience of human nature?  It appears,
inferences from what they saw on the argument from experience; and
 Mozley bases his belief in their testimony on the same
  The weakness of his conclusion is quadrupled by this double
rationality.
our trust in the order of nature, it far more effectually abolishes
 Mozley seeks to found the Christian religion.


Mr.
  There is a dash of scorn in the energy
  Probably some previous writer had made
  Finding the
contradiction to the order of nature, he sets himself to examine the
  With a vigour of logic rarely
disposes of this belief in a manner calculated to startle those who,
nature was secure.
of nature, is the belief that the future will be like the past.
is not, according to Mr.
belief.

effects, extending further, and about to produce other and more

physical phenomenon for the first time.
we should have but the very faintest expectation of another.
did occur again, once or twice, so far from counting on another

hesitation in inviting persons from a distance to see it; and if it
us, its cessation a marvel.
.
an expectation that any part of the course of nature will be the next
e.
uniformity of nature?  None.
for the contrary to the recurrence of a fact of nature is no
  No probable reason can be given; for all probable
presumption of likeness, and therefore cannot be the foundation of it.
No reason can be given for this belief.
  It
principle.


 Mozley, however, adds, 'depends upon this belief,
employ against it, all calculation, all adjustment of means to ends,
reason for it than a speculation of fancy.
all-important for the purposes of life, but solely practical, and

'.
.
 Mozley, 'of the inductive
nature--by whatever phrase we designate the same instinct--is to
on of human society.
general, but it is 'an unintelligent impulse, of which we can give no
' It is inserted into our constitution solely to
meet the future on the perfectly gratuitous supposition that it will

'Thus, step by step,' says Mr.
feels his position to be a strong one, 'has philosophy loosened the
befriending in exact proportion as it has done this the principle of
' For 'this belief not having itself a foundation in reason,
opposed to the order of nature, are opposed to reason.
this belief in connection with science, 'in which connection it
the result is the same.
unreasoning impulse applied to a scientifically ascertained fact.
.
Science has led up to the fact; but there it stops, and for converting
play, the same as that which generalises the commonest observation of
'
The eloquent pleader of the cause of miracles passes over without a
rational regarding the principles or method by which such results have
  Here, as elsewhere, he declines the test, 'By their
' Perhaps our best way of proceeding will be
the unintelligent impulse with which Mr.
which shall show, by illustration, the surreptitious method whereby

Before the sixteenth century it was known that water rises in a pump;
vacuum.
which the water would ascend, until, on one occasion, the gardeners of
found that the column ceased at a height of thirty-two feet.
this all the skill of the pump-maker could not get it to rise.
fact was brought to the notice of Galileo, and he, soured by a world
the philosophy of the time by remarking that nature evidently abhorred
  Galileo, however, did
  It was taken up by his pupil Torricelli, to
be forced into the tube by a pressure applied to the surface of the
  But where, under the actual circumstances, was such a
Torricelli that the atmosphere might possibly exert this pressure;
water thirty-two feet high might be of the exact weight necessary to

There is much in this process of pondering and its results which it is
  It is by a kind of inspiration that we rise
which they depend.
which is gradually cleansed by the effort to think rightly, and which,
of truth.
and induction, in its highest form, is, as I have just stated, a kind
  But, to make it sure, the inward sight must be shown
  To prove or disprove the

Torricelli reasoned thus: If a column of water thirty-two feet high
of a heavier liquid ought to do the same.
times heavier than water; hence, if my induction be correct, the

experiment.
closed at one end and open at the other, and filling it with mercury,
filled with the liquid metal.
Torricelli removed his thumb, and the delight he experienced on
to human eyes.
thirty inches, leaving the Torricellian vacuum over-head.
hour the theory of the pump was established.

  He
the higher we ascend in the air, the lower the column ought to sink,
  He caused a
column; and it was found that during the ascent the column sank, and

Between the time here referred to and the present, millions of
  Every village pump is
  In thousands of instances,
infallibly been found that the well was dry, that the pump required
anomalous action.
pump-maker has been found to be the true remedy.
pressure of the atmosphere ceased; constancy, as regards the lifting
  So
  His experience has been the
  Men have climbed mountains, and gone
observed.
indicating any suspension of the operations of nature, or any
examination has in every instance fixed the anomaly upon the
  It is this welding, then, of rigid logic to
 Mozley refers to an 'unreasoning impulse.

  Before his time men
  Kepler
expressions of planetary motion known as 'Kepler's laws.
observed that a magnet attracts iron; and by one of those flashes of
general in the particular, it had been inferred, that the force by
  Newton
  He looked, as was his wont, into the
  How this light arises we
  Let me
ancients could have been but imperfectly acquainted.
most part, found the exercise of fantasy more pleasant than careful
  Hence it is, that
'the reason of man,' they are apt to omit from their conception of

Well, Newton slowly marshalled his thoughts, or rather they came to
intellectual births out of chaos.
own.
know the magnitude of the attraction, and the law of its variation
  His conceptions first of all passed from the

conclusion, that every particle of matter attracts every other
between the particles.

verify it, or to disprove it, was the next question.
of the philosopher in this direction was to prove, mathematically,
constituted of particles which obey this law; then the action of a
as that which would be exerted if the whole mass of the sphere were
  Practically speaking, then, the
to bodies attracted by the earth.

the earth's attraction at the earth's surface, or at a distance of
  His object now was to measure the
diminution.
He had no balloon?  and even if he had, he knew that any height to
problem.
body 240,000 miles, or sixty times the earth's radius, from the
  He virtually weighed the moon, and found that weight
  This is
  I will not dwell here upon the
self-denial in withholding them because they did not quite agree with
  Newton's action in this matter
  If it were otherwise--if
were satisfied with the imperfect while the perfect is attainable,
would be a house of clay, ill-fitted to bear the buffetings of the

Thus we see that Newton, like Torricelli, first pondered his facts,
character of the force of gravitation.
inward to the principle, he reversed his steps, carried the principle
nature.

attention.
  As far back
laws; and neither Kepler nor Newton entertained a doubt as to their
  Year after year, as the ages rolled, they
the heavens.
  The scientific mind can
  The
the sequence?  What is it that binds the consequent to its antecedent
it reaches the _forces_ by which the observed succession is produced.
was thus with Torricelli; it was thus with Newton; it is thus
  In common with the
that summer will succeed spring, that autumn will succeed summer, and
  But he knows still further--and this
succession, besides being permanent, is, under the circumstances,
revolving sphere with an axis inclined to the plane of its orbit, must
  Not until this
of reason rendered concentric with the law of nature; and not until
peace.

not that on which the scientific mind founds its belief in the order
  If the force be _permanent_ the phenomena are _necessary_,
before.
eventually relate to the permanence of force.
from Newton to our own time, eager eyes have been scanning the
solar system.
experimenting, and reflecting on the action of gravity at the surface
  Nothing has occurred to indicate that the operation of
that nature has been crossed by spontaneous action, or that a state of
the preceding state.

time of Galileo, the competent mathematician of that day could predict
  We calculate eclipses in advance,
  We determine the dates
calculation and history in harmony.
the planets have been over and over again observed; but these, instead
invariably been reduced to consequences of that law.
referring the perturbations of Uranus to any interference on the part
which the astronomer proposed to himself was, 'How, in accordance with
was enabled to fix the point of space in which, if a mass of matter
  We know the
  The practical astronomer turned his telescope towards the
explored, and the Planet now named Neptune was found in its predicted
  A very respectable outcome, it will be admitted, of an impulse
rational principle;' which possesses 'no intellectual character;'
in that 'large irrational department' discovered for it, by Mr.
Mozley, in the hitherto unexplored wilderness of the human mind.

order of nature, says Mr.
the affairs of life, and the carrying on of human society.
it may be asked, has the planet Neptune, or the belts of Jupiter, or
society?  How is society affected by the fact that the sun's
hydrogen gas?  Nineteen-twentieths of the force employed in the
 Mozley, is
these.
on the sun have a decennial period, and that when a magnet is closely
synchronise with the appearance and disappearance of the solar spots?
intellectual toil amply rewarded by being privileged to solve, at its
  The inductive principle is
among phenomena which are reducible to order by his intellect: The
study of its laws, reason could never have awakened to the higher
  It is the Non-ego through and by
 We hold it to be an
stand in this relation, and the work we have accomplished is the

Before these methods were adopted the unbridled imagination roamed
superstitious dread.
and miracles, and special providences, and Mr.
reason of man,' had the world to themselves.
nothing of it--_worse_, I say, because they let and hindered those who
  Hence it is, that during a single
knowledge is all but infinite as compared with that of the ages which

The believers in magic and miracles of a couple of centuries ago had
 Mozley's present logic on their side.
had done for themselves what he rejoices in having so effectually done
declared magic, miracles, and witchcraft to be matters for 'ordinary
  'The principle of miracles' thus 'befriended'
  Lacking that rock-barrier of
men were hurried on to deeds, the bare recital of which makes the
  Skilled in all the rules of human evidence, and
went systematically astray, and committed the deadliest wrongs against
  And why?  Because they could not put Nature into the
nothing.
relied on; but in all cases between man and nature, they were blind
 [Footnote: 'In 1664 two women were hung in
opportunity of declaring that the reality of witchcraft was
secondly, the wisdom of all nations had provided laws against such
"
writer, was called as a witness, and swore "that he was clearly of
"--Lecky's History of
 i.
 120.

 Mozley concedes that it would be no great result if miracles were
to satisfy those who do not enquire.
great result' that they have been accepted by the educated.
sense educated?  Like those statesmen, jurists, and church dignitaries
glanced at above?  Not even in this sense; for the great mass of Mr.
Mozley's educated people had no legal training, and must have been
training at naught.
day, they were versed in the literature of Greece, Rome, and Judea;
needful, they were 'noble savages,' and nothing more.
miracles, then, it behoves us to understand the weight of the
depositions of nature, before we attempt to measure, with them, the
  We have only to open our eyes to see what honest and
evidence, in this nineteenth century of the Christian era, and in
  The experience thus gained ought, I
inhabiting a sunnier clime, with a richer imagination, and without a
have imposed upon mankind.


 Mozley's views to the examination which they
his book without expressing my admiration of his genius, and my
  Though barely known to him personally, his
  With regard to the
the 'Times' winds up its able and appreciative review.
throughout with the most serious and earnest conviction, but is
against opponents; and this not from any deficiency of feeling as to
maintained self-control, and from an over-ruling, ever-present sense
'
[To the argument regarding the quantity of the miraculous, introduced
 Mozley has done me the honour of publishing a Reply in
'--J.
]
ADDITIONAL REMARKS ON MIRACLES.

 Mozley's

 Mozley rates
of the recorded miracles, and to increase proportionably the
  The ancients knew but little of the vastness
  The Rev.
 Kirkman, for example, has shown what
heaven;' and Sir George Airy refers to the case of a Greek philosopher
that the sun might be as large as the whole country of Greece.
concerns of a universe, regarded from this point of view, were much
which science now reveals to us; and hence that to suit man's
in the order of the universe, was more easy of belief in the ancient
  In the very magnitude which it assigns to
man, and increased the popular belief in their orderly progression.

it used to be, whenever it is affirmed that the order of nature has
  Let us take as an illustration the miracle by which
  In
day' upon Gibeon, and the moon in the valley of Ajalon.
of average education at the present day would naturally demand a
than would have satisfied an Israelite in the age succeeding that of
  For to the one, the miracle probably consisted in the
other it would be the stoppage of an orb fourteen hundred thousand
  And even accepting the interpretation that
occurred was the suspension of the earth's rotation, I think the right
stronger evidence in support of it than that which would have
science.

the exercise of the former, the stoppage of the earth's rotation is
with the result to be obtained by it, that belief reels under the
  The energy here involved is equal to that of six
Joshua in the destruction of his foes.
expended would be sufficient to supply every individual of an army a
the fighting power of each of Joshua's soldiers, not for the few hours
of years.
historian, manifestly because he knew nothing about it.
therefore, we consider the miracle as purely evidential, or as a
stares us in the face.
the Israelites knew nothing of its amount; if simply destructive, then
inferred from the foregoing figures.

  Transferring our thoughts
where countless worlds with freights of life probably revolve unseen,
space; reflecting that beyond these sparks of solar fire, suns
all; and bringing these reflections face to face with the idea of the
exhibiting His hinder parts, or behaving in other familiar ways

were it not associated with words of imperishable wisdom, and with
human race, both the miracles and their 'evidences' would have long

exclaim in David's spirit, if not in David's words: 'When I consider
thou hast ordained; what is man that thou shouldst be mindful of him,

answer is, Not I.
this universe chose to stop the rotation of the earth, or to take the
I am not prepared to contradict you.
differ from you, for it is a subject of which I know nothing.
observe that in such questions regarding Almighty power, your
universe, but to the power of your own imagination.
not has the Omnipotent done so and so?  or is it in the least degree
imagination competent to picture a Being able and willing to do so and
  To the human mind
combining, indefinitely the objects revealed by the senses.
imagine a mouse as large as an elephant, an elephant as large as a
  It can separate
  We see a fish and we see a woman
to a mermaid.
one half of each, and unite the other two halves to a centaur.
also the pictorial representations of the Deity, the bodies and wings
the joys of the blessed, and the torments of the damned, have been

rules the universe are not mere fanciful or ignorant enlargements of
  The capabilities of what you call your reason are not
  By the exercise of the faculty here adverted to, you can
conceivable thing.
Power science is of no avail--that it is 'a weapon of air.
science, however, while accepting the figure, would probably reverse
air, but that unsubstantial pageant of the imagination to which the





        meanness.

*****


THE Editor of the 'Contemporary Review' is liberal enough to grant me
was simply that of a vehicle of transmission, has brought down upon me

It may be interesting to some of my readers if I glance at a few cases
kindred questions.
deemed unscriptural and heretical.
with the people who held this notion as my censors are now with me,
'
cosmogony and religion were indissolubly associated, and, therefore,
  In the early part of the seventeenth
stars revolved round it daily, was interwoven with religious feeling,
kindling the persecution of the Church.
the indignation excited by the first revelations of geology regarding
being for the time indissoluble.
best-informed theologians are prepared to admit that our views of the
abandonment of the Mosaic account of the Creation.
the excitement caused by the publication of the 'Origin of Species;'
more outspoken, and, from the old point of view, more impious,
'
Thus religion survives-after the removal of what had been long
  In our day the Antipodes are accepted;
reputed age of the world are alike dissipated; Evolution is looked
direction too numerous to be dwelt upon here.
earliest times to the present, religion has been undergoing a process
errors which the active but uninformed intellect mingled with the
  Some of us think that a final act of
confidence and the warmth of ancient times.
present is _the physical value of prayer_.
surprise, much less to draw forth protest, by the employment of this
  I would simply ask any intelligent person to look the problem
the great body of those who sincerely resort to it, prayer does not,
augments the descent of rain, which changes the force and direction of
cattle a Power, in short, which, when appealed to under pressing
in the ordinary course of things.
with the subject, and refuses to blur his moral vision by intellectual

It is under this aspect alone that the scientific student, so far as I
  Forced upon his
energy, he claims the right of subjecting it to those methods of
universe is derived.
adverse to its claims--if his enquiries rivet him still closer to the
evil and on the good, and sendeth rain upon the just and upon the
extinction.
domain.

and not on any inherent, unreasonableness in the act of prayer.
theory that the system of nature is under the control of a Being who
opinion, a perfectly legitimate one.
futile by being associated `with conceptions which contradict it; but
  It is a matter
wise and tender, listens to the requests of his children, and, if they
  We know
limits, of the current of events on earth.
offered by experience, it is no departure from scientific method to
the prayers of His children, alters the currents of those phenomena.
Thus far Theology and Science go hand in hand.
aether, for example, trembling with the waves of light, is suggested
like manner the conception of personal volition in nature is suggested
  I therefore urge no
  I do
the theologian has as good a right to place his conception at the root

But without _verification_ a theoretic conception is a mere figment of
point.
behind the world of the senses, but the verification of theory occurs
  To check the theory we have simply to compare
  If the
in opposition, the theory is given up.
frequently devised, by which the theory must stand or fall.
character was the determination of the velocity of light in liquids,
  According to it, light
Theory, it travelled faster in air than in water.
suggested by Arago, and executed by Fizeau and Foucault, was

But while science cheerfully submits to this ordeal, it seems
does not rouse resentment in theological minds.
pleasure of the scientific man culminates in the demonstrated harmony
been already tasted in the very act of praying, prior to verification,
peace?  Or is it that we have before us a residue of that mysticism of
referring things and events not to clear and distinct notions, not to
distant, and vast, which we cannot bring into contact with facts; as
'
particulars, not to generalisations, homogeneous and immediate, but to
process of this reference is not a calm act of the intellect, but is
'
Every feature here depicted, and some more questionable ones, have
leaders' of a weekly journal of considerable influence, and one, on
  In the
found two or three letters well calculated to correct the temporary

It is not my habit of mind to think otherwise than solemnly of the
  It is a power which I should like to
of wasted upon air.
as alleged, be necessary to man's highest culture.
that, while I rank many persons who resort to prayer low in the scale
case intensified by the notion that they have access to the ear of
of the earth.
one is turned to enduring sweetness, holiness, abounding charity, and
  Religion, in fact, varies with the
  Often unreasonable, if not contemptible,
neglect without moral loss.
delusive value, by claiming for it a power in physical nature.
strengthen the heart to meet life's losses, and thus indirectly
a treasure of fertility greater than the golden treasure sought.
indirect issues we all admit; but it would be simply dishonest to
  Here, for the
  I ask no space to reply to those railers who
blasphemy.
accuracy to their statements, or to render their charges worthy of





  VITALITY.

have always engaged the attention of thinking men.
them it was usual to assume a special agent, free to a great extent

and animals were supposed to collect their materials and to assume
  Within the last few years, however, our ideas of
interest, and even disquietude, which the change has excited are amply
regarding the phenomena of vitality.
through all their modifications, the most advanced philosophers of the
power, from which all vital energy is derived; and the disquieting
supernatural agent, but a reservoir of what, if we do not accept the
  In short, it
plants and animals is drawn from the sun.

nine out of ten of those who are alarmed by the form which this
to its correctness.
scientific, and they were by no means prepared to see a rigid
  This, however, is
energy whatever in the vegetable or animal organism, but that all the
that which we develop by the combustion of wood or coal, has been
  The sun is so much the colder that we
horse-racing and Alpine climbing.
the sun has been chilled to an extent capable of being accurately
year a certain number of tourists from the vale of Chamouni to the

To most minds, however, the energy of light and heat presents itself
  Either
  Wood can be
striking a piece of iron a skilful blacksmith can cause it to glow.
Thus, by the rude agency of his hammer, he generates light and heat.
This action, if carried far enough, would produce the light and heat
  In fact, the sun's light and heat have actually been
the sun is thus supported or not, it is perfectly certain that he
  Whether, moreover, the whilom molten
collision of cosmic masses or not, it is perfectly certain that the

If, then, solar light and heat can be produced by the impact of dead
energies which we have been accustomed to call _vital_, it indubitably

In what sense, then, is the sun to be regarded as the origin of the
intelligible answer to this question.
sea-level to a high elevation, and then permitted to descend.
descending it may be made to assume various forms--to fall in
tranquilly along a uniform bed.
complex machinery in motion, to turn millstones, throw shuttles, work
  But every form of power here
the water to the height from which it fell.
_generated_ by the machinery: the work performed by the water in
expended in raising it.
plants and animals the parcelling out and distribution of a power
  In the case of the water, the source
liquid from a low level of the earth's surface, and its elevation to a
in its descent.
consists in the forcible separation of the atoms of compound
  We name the force which draws the water
affinity'; but these different names must not mislead us regarding the
  They are both _attractions_;
atoms is not more difficult of conception than the falling of water to

The building up of the vegetable, then, is effected by the sun,
  The phenomena of animal
reduction.
air; and in our bodies the oxygen, which had been lifted from the
them, producing animal heat and developing animal forms.
most complicated phenomena of vitality this law runs: the vegetable
weight falls.
  The water
in its descent, but the _form_ of the motion depends on the character of
  In a similar way,
molecules among which their energy is distributed.
determine the form which the solar energy will assume.
separation of the carbon and oxygen this energy may be so conditioned
case in the formation of an oak.
the carbon and the oxygen, the molecular machinery through which the
while in another it may weave the texture of a man.

  There is
the rocks, the water, and the air.
then, different in kind from those of inorganic matter?  The
  It is the
inorganic, that constitutes the mystery and the miracle of vitality.
Every portion of every animal body may be reduced to purely inorganic
  A perfect reversal of this process of reduction would carry
conceivable.
the wall of partition between organic and inorganic, and to reduce
are differently compounded.

molecular form.
power of genius which breathes large meanings into scanty facts,
combustion of which sustains muscular action.
machinery by which the dynamic power of the blood is brought into
  Thus the blood is consumed.
slowly than the blood, wastes also, so that after a certain number of
  How is the sense of personal identity
matter is necessary to consciousness; but the matter of any period may
continuity.
that depart, seem to whisper their secret to their comrades that

of the molecules themselves, is the correlative of this constancy of
  Life is a wave which in no two consecutive moments of its

Supposing, then, the molecules of the human body, instead of replacing
hand from nature and put together in the same relative positions as
  Supposing them to have the
distribution of motions--would this organised concourse of molecules
reason to believe that it would not.
from the sun, set spinning round an axis, and revolving round the sun
consequences of its refrigeration be the development of organic forms?
  _Structural_ forces are certainly in the
plant or an animal.
marvels of crystalline force; and who will set limits to the possible
it is because matter has been defined and maligned by philosophers and
essentially mystical and transcendental.

from their audacity, which is sure, in due time, to disappear.
the sooner the public dread is abolished with reference to such
  As regards knowledge,
  In one sense it knows, or is destined to
  In another sense it knows nothing.
understands much of this intermediate phase of things that we call
origin or destiny of nature.
rays their alleged power?  Who or what made and bestowed upon the
interaction?  Science does not know: the mystery, though pushed back,
  To many of us who feel that there are more things
science, but who have been also taught, by baffled efforts, how vain
mind is that of Goethe:
    Who dares to name His name,
    Veiled in mystery as He is, the All-enfolder?
    Feels the lifted soul His might,


********************
  As I rode through the Schwarzwald, I said to myself: That little fire
  smith bends over his anvil, and thou hopest to replace thy lost
  Universe; or indissolubly joined to the whole?  Thou fool, that
  circulates from before Noah's Deluge, from beyond the Dogstar;
  of Man, are cunning affinities and battles and victories of Force
  great vital system of Immensity.
  unconscious Altar, kindled on the bosom of the All.
.
  separated!  I say there is no such separation: nothing hitherto was
  works together with all; is borne forward on the bottomless, shoreless
--CARLYLE.


V.

[Footnote: A Lecture delivered to the working men of Dundee, September
]
It is the custom of the Professors in the Royal School of Mines in

disposed of as quickly as they can be handed to those who apply for
  So desirous are the working men of London to attend these
large proportion to those who succeed.
could hold 2,000 instead of 600, I do not doubt that every one of its
  It is, moreover, worthy
help the working man in his daily pursuits.
is hardly ever of a nature which admits of being turned into money.
is, therefore, a pure desire for knowledge, as a thing good in itself,
hearers of these lectures.

composed in part of the aristocracy of rank, while the audience just
  As
audiences has anything to learn of the other; neither can claim
  It would not, perhaps, be quite correct
samples of their class; they are probably picked men--the aristocracy
  At all events, their conduct
understand by a gentleman are confined to no class; and they have
artisans as well as lords, could, by some process of selection, be
other better.

to give an evening lecture to the working men of Dundee, my experience
heavily weighted with other duties, I could not bring myself to
  Hitherto, the evening discourses
associates alone.
where the working men, at their own request, were addressed by our
 Grove, and by my excellent friend, Professor
of the Association an address to the working men of the town in which
  A resolution to that effect was sent to the
the Council of the Association ratified the decision of the Committee;
wishes.


endowment conferred once for all on man at his creation, we find him
surrounded by objects which excite its questionings, and raise the
  It is related of a young Prince of one of
looking-glass, he ran round the glass to see who was standing at the
  And thus it is with the general human intellect, as regards the
  It wishes to get behind and learn
  What is the sun, what
and looked over?  What is the meaning of thunder and lightning, of
early men, and by and by it was discovered that this desire for
  After many trials it became
nature's facts, and that, within certain limits, the secret of the
  It was found that the
his five senses; that the things which are seen in the material world
phenomena which address the senses, there are laws and principles and
and can be, spiritually discerned.

molecular force.
entertained upon this subject, we have to go a long way back.
drawing of a bow, the darting of a javelin, the throwing of a
man became acquainted with the operation of _force_.
discipline, moreover, taught him foresight.
season stores of food, thus obtaining time to look about him, and to
  Two things which he noticed must
  He found that a kind of resin
drawing light bodies to itself, and of causing them to cling to it;
a particular kind of metal.
amber, and to the load-stone, or natural magnet, and its power to
  Previous experience of his own muscles had

amber, pulls and pushes--attractions and repulsions--were also
external to himself, conceptions derived from himself.
the rubbed amber were credited with pushing and pulling, or, in other

In the time of the great Lord Bacon the margin of these pushes and
 Gilbert, a man probably of firmer
  Gilbert
power which, thousands of years previously, had been observed in
  In this way the notion of attraction and repulsion in external
  It was a matter of experience that
the power of acting upon each other; and the action came to be
'
But out of experience in science there grows something finer than mere
  Experience furnishes the soil for plants of higher
for speculation upon the largest of problems.
fall to the earth.
revolve round the sun; and the moon to revolve round the earth.
should they do so?  What prevents them from flying straight off into
rocky crust a firmly fixed and tightly stretched chain started towards
its orbit by the chain--that the sun twirls the earth around him, as a
  But why
can attract each other at a distance, without the intervention of any
  Why should not the sun and earth so attract each other?  and
attraction by the earth?  Here then we reach one of those higher

we pass on to the observation of force exerted between a magnet and
growth of ideas, to a conception of the force by which sun and planets

This idea of attraction between sun and planets had become familiar in
  He set himself to examine the attraction; and
materials upon experience.
magnetic and electric bodies, that the nearer they were brought
increasing the distance, the force diminished until it became
  Hence the inference that the assumed pull between the

with the distance; but Newton supplemented the guess by the severe
  Comparing the pull of the earth
miles away, Newton rigidly established the law of variation with the
  But on his way to this result Newton found room for other
stepping-stones to his result.
that not only does the sun attract the earth, and the earth attract
particle of the earth, and the reverse.
attraction of the masses was simply the sum of the attractions of

This result seems so obvious that you will perhaps wonder at my
of force.
ancient world named Democritus, Epicurus, and Lucretius.
adopted, developed, and diffused the doctrine of atoms and molecules,
Dalton.
followers, up to the time of Newton, pictured their atoms as falling
imaginary hooks and claws.
and molecules could come together, not by being fortuitously knocked
  This is one
  He familiarised the world with

Newton, you know, was preceded by a grand fellow named John Kepler--a
his master, Tycho Brahe, had actually found that the planets moved as
  Kepler knew as much about the motion of
generally the facts of planetary motion.
 The
question for Newton, and it was the solution of it which renders his
  Starting from the principle that every
by a force which varies as the inverse square of the distance between
observation makes them to be.
the earth, and that the planets fell towards the sun, through the
  This
and the conception of which was necessary to Newton's intellectual

Gravitation is a purely attractive force, but in electricity and

  In the case of
experience, compelling it to conclude that the polarity of the magnet
  I hold a magnetised strip of steel by
other half repels, the north end of a magnetic needle.
strip in the middle, find that this half, which a moment ago attracted
now divided into two new halves, one of which wholly attracts, and the
  The half
  You may break this
very smallness of the fragments; the smallest fragment is found
  But you
the conclusion entertained by all scientific men, that the magnet
cannot see and feel, but which, as before stated, must be

Magnetism then is a polar force; and experience hints that a force of
  It is known, for
definite lines, called, by some, 'magnetic curves,' and, by others,
' Over two magnets now before me is spread a
  Scattering iron filings over the paper, polar force
force.
term--exerted on the part of the iron filings.
experience which, as you will see immediately, furnishes further
intellectual clearness and repose, while speculating upon apparently

The magnetic force has here acted upon particles visible to the eye.
But, as already stated, there are numerous processes in nature which
the mind.
  Long
matter is composed of atoms from which, whether separate or in
  The air we
oxygen and nitrogen.
and hydrogen.
water the oxygen and hydrogen are not mechanically mixed, but
  The atoms of oxygen and those of hydrogen exert
sufficient proximity they rush together with an almost incredible
  But powerful as is the force with
tearing them asunder, and the agent by which we accomplish this may

Into a vessel containing acidulated water I dip two strips of metal,
touch each other in the liquid.
strips by a piece of copper wire.
what, for want of a better name, we call an 6 electric current.
the inner change of the wire is we do not know, but we do know that a
 Let
  Before you is a series of
force of all ten.
 I
cling to it.
the battery, and subject it to the same test.
crowd round the wire and cling to it.
the filings immediately fall; the power of attraction continues only

Here is a piece of similar wire, overspun with cotton, to prevent the
  I make the coil

now empties this tool-box of its iron nails.
wire round this common poker; connecting the wire with the two ends of
magnet.
six inches apart.
suddenly together; reversing what is called the direction of the
  All these effects
figure as flowing through the wire when the voltaic circuit is

By the same agent we tear asunder the locked atoms of a chemical
  Into this small cell, containing water, dip two thin wires.
A magnified image of the cell is thrown upon the screen before you,
  From a small battery I
  Bubbles of gas rise
the water is composed.
wire, the hydrogen on the other.
separately or mixed.
the mixture of both gases.
explosion is heard.
and without injury to my hand, and the water from which they were

*****
One consequence of the rushing together of the atoms is the
  What is this heat?  Here are two ivory balls
  I draw
  They clash together, but, by
rattle succeeds their collision.
figure to your mind a pair of clashing atoms.
place, a motion of the one atom towards the other--a motion of
motion of vibration.
heat.
atoms themselves; secondly, the force with which they attract each
force.
and then as a motion of vibration, to which latter we give the name of
  For some time after the act of combination this motion is so
being maintained in a state of vapour.
other words loses its motion, the molecules coalesce to form a liquid.

  As long as
this force is altogether masked and bidden.
gradually withdrawn, the molecules prepare for new arrangements and
  Solid crystals of water are at length formed, to which
  Looking at these beautiful edifices
the question, How are they built up?  We have obtained clear
polar force may be resident in the molecules or smallest particles of
possible.
action of a mind furnished with this knowledge?  It is compelled to
crystals are built with definite poles whence issue attractions and
  In virtue of these forces some poles are drawn together,
molecule to molecule, not boisterously or fortuitously, but silently
which guide a human builder when he places his materials together.
Imagine the bricks and stones of this town of Dundee endowed with

Imagine them attracting and repelling, and arranging themselves into
Hardly less wonderful is the play of force by which the molecules of
your ponds and lakes.

architecture, its beauty would delight and astonish you.
of the process of crystallisation may be actually shown.
molecules of a piece of ice may be taken asunder before your eyes; and
the manner in which they go together.
electric lamp through a plate of glass, a portion of the beam is
within it.
the beam is also absorbed; but instead of warming the ice, the
  It is to the delicate silent
attention.
ice: the light of the beam passes freely through the ice without
part intercepted, and that heat now applies itself to the work of
  Selecting certain points for attack, round
architecture, and reducing to the freedom of liquidity molecules which
  The liquefied spaces
  Observe those
in size as the action of the beam continues.
liquefied ice.
crystals fall asunder, so as to leave behind them these exquisite
  We have here a process of demolition which clearly reveals the
  In this fashion, and in strict
place upon our ponds and lakes during the frosts of winter.
the language of an American poet, 'the atoms march in tune,' moving to
a miracle of beauty.

universe of its wonder and mystery, but, as in the case before us, to
  Those
windowpanes, illustrate the action of the same force.
such a pane before the fires are lighted, and reduce the solid
resolidification.
through a common magnifying glass.
the film, abandoned to the action of its own forces, appears for a
  Lines of motion run through it; molecule closes
liquidity, through this state of motion, to its final crystalline

I can show you something similar.
glass I pour a little water in which certain crystals have been
  A film of the solution clings to the glass.
microscope and a lamp, an image of the plate of glass is thrown upon
  The beam of the lamp, besides illuminating the glass,
solution has become supersaturated, splendid branches of crystal shoot
  A dozen square feet of surface are now covered
  With another solution we obtain crystalline
  From distant nuclei
rapidity in all directions.
frosty morning exhibits effects quite as wonderful as these.
in these formless solutions, latent in every drop of water, lies this
opposing forces to bring it into action.

silver--a compound of silver and nitric acid.
current is sent through this liquid the silver is severed from the
experiment; and I would ask you to observe how the metal behaves when
  The image of the cell,
clearly shown upon the screen.
current through the liquid.
tree commences immediately to sprout.
thrown out, and umbrageous foliage loads the branches.
a growth, apparently as wonderful as that of any vegetable, perfected
  Substituting for the nitrate of silver
electric current severs the lead from the acid, and you see the metal
as they become too heavy, break from their roots and fall to the

These experiments show that the common matter of our earth--'brute
 Young, in his _Night Thoughts_, is pleased to call
into free play, arranges itself, under the operation of these forces,
  And
of these molecular forces?  Here, as elsewhere throughout nature, if
vegetable or mineral, is produced, it is through the operation of the

The solid matter of which our lead and silver trees were formed was,
matter of which our woods and forests are composed is also, for the
quantities with the air of our atmosphere.
union of carbon and oxygen, and is called carbonic acid gas.
carbonic acid of the air being subjected to an action somewhat
silver solutions, has its carbon liberated and deposited as woody
  The watery vapour of the air is subjected to similar action;
with the carbon in the tissues of the tree.
is permitted to wander away into the atmosphere.
nature that plays the part of the electric current in our experiments,
rays of the sun.
acid and the aqueous vapour of the air, answer to the cells in which
  And just as the molecular attractions
branching forms seen in our experiments, so do the molecular
the architecture of grasses, plants, and trees.

mechanical power.
formation of crystals and vegetables we have examples of molecular
  You have learned how the atoms of oxygen and hydrogen rush
  I have not thought it necessary to dwell upon
be said, in passing, that the clashing together of 1 lb.
and 8 lbs.
 of aqueous vapour, is greater than
against the earth.
hydrogen should rise by their mutual attractions to the velocity
must exist between the particles.
velocity is attained.


importance in our conception of the system of the world.
matter of the world may be classified under two distinct heads: atoms
mutual attractions, and atoms and molecules which have not yet

molecules of the latter kind.
because sufficient distance intervenes between the attracting atoms,
  Thus we
but once they are combined, and once the vibratory motion consequent
out of their mutual attraction.
  The
whose atoms have already closed in chemical union--whose mutual
  Granite, for instance, is a widely
oxygen, potassium, calcium, and aluminum, whose atoms united long ago,
  Limestone is composed of carbon, oxygen, and
chemical union, and are therefore finally at rest.
might go over nearly the whole of the materials of the earth's crust,
past, and long before any creature appeared on the earth capable of

prevalent in the world, to regard everything as made for human use.
Those who entertain this notion, hold, I think, an overweening opinion
  Flowers bloomed
utilise it is all but infinite compared with what now remains.
truly heirs of all the ages; but as honest men it behoves us to learn
should prove less than we had supposed.
with reference to this subject is that of the poet, who, when asked
the flower:
    Why thou wert there, O rival of the rose!
    But in my simple ignorance supposed

                                     Emerson.

earth's crust--vast in relation to us, but trivial in comparison to
  They
  By far the most
  Distance still intervenes
which the atoms may be urged by their mutual attractions; and we can
  Once the carbon and the oxygen have
are satisfied; and, while they continue in this condition, as dynamic
  Our woods and forests are also sources of
atmospheric oxygen.
source of motive power just referred to is also the source of muscular
  A horse can perform work, and so can a man; but this work is
the air.
close proximity with the carbon and the hydrogen of the body.
unite in obedience to their mutual, attractions; and their motion
mechanism of the body, becomes muscular motion.

tap root from which they all spring.
out of nothing nothing comes; that neither in the organic world nor in
neither in the plant nor in the animal is there a creation of force or
  Trees grow, and so do men and horses; and here we have new
  But its source, as I
  It is the sun that separates the
recombine.
or in the animal body, the origin of the power they produce is the
  In this sense we are all 'souls of fire and children of the
' But, as remarked by Helmholtz, we must be content to share our

Some estimable persons, here present, very possibly shrink from
tendency towards what is called materialism--a word which, to many
  But it ought to be known
materialist.
alone.
whether in the organic world or the inorganic, whether in the
men, the physical philosopher will make good his right to investigate
  It is perfectly vain to attempt to stop enquiry in this
  Depend upon it, if a chemist by bringing the proper
would do it.
it.
on the possibility of producing what we call life out of inorganic
  Let them pursue their studies in peace; it is only by such
operation of the laws of matter and force.

investigation--while I consider science to be alike powerful as an
wants of men; if you ask me whether it has solved, or is likely in our
doubt.
who accompanied him to Egypt discussed in his presence the origin of
  He
gentlemen; but who made these?'  That question still remains
  As far as I
applied to the solution of the problem.

range of notes, beyond which in both directions we have an infinitude
  The phenomena of matter and force lie within our
push our enquiries.
mystery of this universe lies unsolved, and, as far as we are
  Fashion this mystery as you
  But let your conception of it
  Invest that conception with your highest and
than is given to man to know.
professing to see in the phenomena of the material world the evidences
  Doubt those who would deduce from
who were crushed.
cattle-plague, and bad harvests, evidences of Divine anger.
those spiritual guides who in Scotland have lately propounded the
consequence of railway travelling on Sundays.
you are concerned, libel the system of nature with their ignorant
  Looking from the solitudes of thought into this highest
well might the mightiest of living Scotchmen--that strong and earnest
debtor--well, I say, might your noble old Carlyle scornfully retort on

    He formed all souls, all systems, planets, particles;
    Was--Heavens!--was thy small nine-and-thirty articles!




  Here, indeed, we arrive at the barrier which needs to be perpetually
  mental phenomena, and to those who are alarmed lest such explanations
  The last class prove by their fear almost as much as
  interpreted in terms of Matter; whereas many whom they vituperate as
  possibility of so interpreting them.


====================

VI.

[Footnote: President's Address to the Mathematical and Physical
]
1868.

Scholar,' insisted on a culture which should be not one-sided, but
  The scholar's intellect was to expand spherically, and not
  In one direction, however, Fichte
become a creator of knowledge, and thus repay, by original labours of
  It was
own researches, so as to render his culture rounded and not one-sided.

constitution and labours of the British Association.
body of men engaged in the pursuit of Natural Knowledge, but variously
  While sympathising with each of its departments, and
student amongst us selects one subject for the exercise of his own
private intelligence a little way into the darkness by which all
  Thus, the geologist deals with the rocks;
astronomer with stellar masses and motions; the mathematician with the
the physical investigator has his own large field in optical, thermal,
  The British Association
knowledge centrifugally outwards, the sum of its labours constituting
  In the
sphere into its component parts, which take concrete form under the

Mathematics and Physics have been long accustomed to coalesce, and
  No matter how subtle a natural
follow it into that of imagination, it is in the long run reducible to
  But the mechanical data once guessed or given,
  The
power which Analysis confers, are potent both As means of physical
  Indeed,
science would be both friable and incomplete.

experiment.
researches or those of others, the investigator proceeds by combining
  He ponders the knowledge he possesses, and
conjectures, and confirms or explodes his conjecture.
and conjectures are by no means leaps in the dark; for knowledge once
  There
itself.
region which surrounds actual knowledge is not, as some seem to think,
  There
verification.
not at all times their ways, and that the brightest flashes in the
their counterparts in the world of fact.
true experimentalist may be defined as the continued exercise of
  His
as it were, the soul.

physical science has, of late years, assumed a momentous position in
  Both in a material and in an intellectual point of view it
social ameliorations, and vast alterations in the popular conception
  By science, in
forsaking its ancient metaphysical channels, and pursuing others which
  This must
deeply imbued with the methods of science, better acquainted with the
theories which they have elaborated.

and possibly also a second-hand, moving over the graduated dial.
do these hands move?  and why are their relative motions such as they
opening the watch, mastering its various parts, and ascertaining their
  When this is done, we find that the
mechanism of the watch when acted upon by the force invested in the
  The motion of the hands may be called a phenomenon of art,
  These also have
going.
mechanism, to discern this store, and to show that from the combined
must, of necessity, flow.

of the manner in which scientific thinkers regard this problem, would
as it will give me occasion to say a word or two on the tendencies and
claim as their own, and where it is futile to oppose their advance;
other region, to which the questionings and yearnings of the

But here your tolerance will be needed.
I think, who said that it is hardly possible to state any truth
  Truth is
and many of the differences which agitate the thinking part of mankind
dwell upon one half of the duality, in forgetfulness of the other.
proper course appears to be to state both halves strongly, and allow
  But
patience.
statement of the one half should clash with our convictions; and to
chime in with our views.
for the statement of the whole, before we pronounce judgment in the

This premised, and I trust accepted, let us enter upon our task.
have been writers who affirmed that the Pyramids of Egypt were natural
learned essay with the express object of refuting this notion.
regard the pyramids as the work of men's hands, aided probably by
  We picture to ourselves the
stones, and, guided by the volition, the skill, and possibly at times

to themselves, and the final form of the pyramid expressed the thought

Let us pass from this illustration of constructive power to another of
  When a solution of common salt is slowly
the salt itself remains behind.
the salt can no longer retain the liquid form; its particles, or
solids--so minute, indeed, as to defy all microscopic power.
evaporation continues, solidification goes on, and we finally obtain,
crystalline mass of a definite form.
seems a mimicry of the architecture of Egypt.
built by the salt, terrace above terrace from base to apex, forming a
dragged by his guides.
without questioning at these pyramidal salt-crystals, as to look at
  How, then,

the constituent molecules of the salt, there is an invisible
the atomic blocks in their positions.
scientific idea, nor do I think your good sense will accept it as a
  The scientific idea is, that the molecules act upon each
other, and repel each other, at certain definite points, or poles, and
result of this play of attraction and repulsion.
blocks of Egypt were laid down by a power external to themselves,
places by the inherent forces with which they act upon each other.

all; but any other crystalline substance would answer my purpose
  Everywhere, in fact, throughout inorganic nature, we
energy ready to come into play, and build the ultimate particles of
  The ice of our winters, and of our polar
mica of our rocks.
minute shells, which are also the product of structural energy; but
act.
to form these crystals, the structural force had to deal with the
  This tendency on the part
forms in obedience to the definite action of force, is, as I have
  It is in the ground on which you tread, in the
  Incipient life, as it were,
nature.

various, and exhibit different degrees of complexity.
avail themselves of all possible means of exploring their molecular
  For this purpose they employ in turn, as agents of
 Polarised
  A beam of such light,
and from this action we infer with more or less clearness the manner
  That differences, for example,
sugar or sugar-candy, is thus strikingly revealed.
often display themselves in chromatic phenomena of great splendour,
of some of the coloured constituents of white light, while others are

And now let us pass from what we are accustomed to regard as a dead
  When this is examined by
crystals are observed.
grain resembles that of the crystal.
are set in definite positions, and in accordance with their
  But what has built together the
already said that you may, if you please, consider the atoms and

  But if in the case of
think you are bound to reject it in the case of the grain, and to
forces with which they act upon each other.
philosophy to invoke an external agent in the one case, and to reject

Instead of cutting our grain of corn into slices and subjecting it to
subject it to a certain degree of warmth.
molecules, both of the corn and of the surrounding earth, be kept in
  Under these
interact, and a definite molecular architecture is the result.
is formed; this bud reaches the surface, where it is exposed to the
motion.
the substances surrounding it were first endowed, enabled the grain
repulsions, and thus to coalesce in definite forms, so the specific
carbonic acid and the aqueous vapour of the air.
those constituents of both for which it has an elective attraction,
  Thus
  Forces are active at the root, forces
atmosphere are drawn upon, and the plant augments in size.
succession the stalk, the ear, the full corn in the ear; the cycle of
to that with which the process began.

conceptive or imagining power of the human mind.
same in kind as our own would, if only sufficiently expanded, be able
  It would see every
repulsions exerted between it and other molecules, the whole process,
force.
forces, the purely human intellect might, if sufficiently expanded,
application of purely mechanical principles, demonstrate that the
like that with which it began.
that which rules the planets in their circuits round the sun.

beginning we agreed it should be stated.
and affirm that in the eye of science the animal body is just as much
the crystal of salt or sugar.
obviously mechanical.
system of valves, or take the exquisite mechanism of the eye or hand.
Animal heat, moreover, is the same in kind as the heat of a fire,
  Animal motion, too, is
Trevethyck's walking-engine from the fuel in its furnace.
matter, the animal body creates nothing; as regards force, it creates
  Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit to his
restated with regard to the animal.
the composition of a nerve, a muscle, or a bone, has been placed in
  And unless the existence of law in
must conclude that, given the relation of any molecule of the body to
mathematically.
problem, but with its _complexity_; and this difficulty might be met by
  Given this
deduced as rigorously and as logically from the egg, as the existence
from the undulatory theory of light.

scientific thinkers more or less distinctly believe.
a crystal, a plant, or an animal, is, in their eyes, a purely
mechanics, in the smallness of the masses, and the complexity of the
  Here you have one half of our dual truth; let us
  Associated with this wonderful
those of physics, but between which and the mechanism we discern no
  A man, for example, can say 'I feel,' 'I
problem?  The human brain is said to be the organ of thought and
our passions or affections are excited, it is through the
  Let us endeavour to be a little more
  I hardly imagine there exists a profound scientific
extreme probability of the hypothesis, that for every fact of
definite molecular condition, of motion or structure, is set up in the
structure, be induced by internal causes instead of external, the
be thrown by morbid action into the precise state of motion which
that nerve will declare itself hot--the mind will accept the
  The retina may
  A blow on the eye causes a
ball produces a star of light, which Newton compared to the circles on
  Disease makes people see visions and dream dreams;
should, on philosophical grounds, expect to find them in that precise
superinduce.

follows that, given the state of the brain, the corresponding thought
corresponding state of the brain might be inferred.
It would be at bottom not a case of logical inference at all, but of
  You may reply, that many of the inferences of
electric current, of a given direction, will deflect a magnetic needle
  But the cases differ in this, that the passage
and that we entertain no doubt as to the final mechanical solution of
  But the passage from the physics of the brain to the
mechanics.
action in the brain, occur simultaneously; we do not possess the
would enable us to pass, by a process of reasoning, from the one to
  They appear together, but we do not know why.
minds and senses so expanded, strengthened, and illuminated, as to
capable of following all their motions, all their groupings, all their
acquainted with the corresponding states of thought and feeling, we
these physical processes connected with the facts of consciousness?'
intellectually impassable.
example, be associated with a right-handed spiral motion of the
left-handed spiral motion.
the motion is in one direction, and, when we hate, that the motion is

In affirming that the growth of the body is mechanical, and that
brain, I think the position of the 'Materialist' is stated, as far as
  I think the materialist will be able
think, in the present condition of the human mind, that he can pass
  I do not think he is entitled to say that his

In reality they explain nothing.
association of two classes of phenomena, of whose real bond of union
  The problem of the connection of body
prescientific ages.
of the human brain, and a trenchant German writer has exclaimed, 'Ohne
we knew it to be the case, the knowledge would not lighten our
  On both sides of the zone here assigned to the materialist
  If you ask him whence is this 'Matter' of
who or what impressed upon them this necessity of running into organic
  Science is mute in reply to these questions.
But if the materialist is confounded and science rendered dumb, who
been revealed?  Let us lower our heads, and acknowledge our ignorance,

Perhaps the mystery may resolve itself into knowledge at some future
  The process of things upon this earth has been one of
  It is a long way from the Iguanodon and his
Association.
scientific or from the theological point of view--as the result of
energy--neither view entitles us to assume that man's present
him.
which we are now enfolded, may offer itself to terrestrial, if not to
  Two-thirds of the rays emitted by the sun fail
  The rays exist, but the visual organ
  And so
now be darting, which require but the development of the proper
Ours, as ours surpasses that of the wallowing reptiles, which once
  Meanwhile the mystery is not without
  It certainly may made a power in the human soul; but it is
  It may be,
strengthening intellect, and in; rescuing man from that littleness to
he is continually prone.



Hacked and hurt by time, the aspect of the mountain from its higher
  Hitherto the impression it made was that of savage
  But this notion of decay
strength of mountainhood.
origin and sculpture.
through molten worlds to that nebulous haze which philosophers have
material things.
within itself the prediction of all that has since occurred; I tried
solar and stellar systems, and all that they involve.
formless fog contain potentially the _sadness_ with which I regarded the
its primeval home?  If so, had we not better recast our definitions of
any definition which omits life and thought must be inadequate, if not
  Are questions like these warranted?  Why not?  If the final
yet arrested, who can say that such yearnings and questionings are not
growth of diviner powers?  When I look at the heavens and the earth,
and ask myself, Is there no being or thing in the universe that knows
theologic schemes of creation, condemnation, and redemption to be
a motive force, can match the warmth of affirmation, dissipated at the
absolute neutrality as regards these ultra-physical questions?  Is
being already formed, such are the questions, without replies, which
weathered crest of the Matterhorn.




  Self-reverence, self-knowledge, self-control,

  Would come uncalled for), but to live by law,
  And, because right is right, to follow right

                          TENNYSON.

*****
VII.

[Footnote: Delivered at University College, London, Session 1968-69.

has sought, and is still seeking, to raise into clearness; the idea,
  Man is not a thing of yesterday; nor do I
address when I say that he is not a thing of 6,000 years ago.
he came originally from stocks or stones, from nebulous gas or solar
transformation is as inscrutable to you and me as that of the grand
the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man
' But however obscure man's origin may be, his
  Here a little and there a little added
what he is.
like a sheet of white paper, on which by education we can write what
  This doctrine assuredly needs qualification and
  In physics, when an external force is applied to a body
result, we must know whether the external force conspires with or
influence of education to bear upon the new-born man his inner powers
  He comes to us as a bundle of
past to the indefinite future;' and he makes his transit from the one
  The object of
capacities, wise direction for his tendencies, and through this
may contribute to the usefulness, the beauty, and the nobleness of his

How is this discipline to be secured, this knowledge imparted?  Two
the labour of centuries having been expended in bringing it to its
becoming daily less so, and giving signs of enormous power, both as a
  These two methods
  I wish they were not
for assuredly it is possible to give both of them fair play.
hardly authorised to express an opinion upon the subject, I
an intellectual discipline of the highest kind.
discussions on the comparative merits of Popery and Protestantism,
  The
Lost'; the linking of the verb to its often distant nominative, of the
transitive verb, of the preposition to the noun or pronoun which it
transpositions often necessary to bring out the true grammatical
the highest value, and a source of unflagging delight.
when I found a great author tripping, and was fairly able to pin him
sentences which exercised me when a boy rise to my recollection.
instance, 'He that hath ears to hear, let him hear;' where the 'He'
it.
  I do
was almost insensible.
should be the last to deny, or even to doubt, the high discipline

That study, moreover, has other merits and recommendations.
I have said, organised and systematised by long-continued use.
an instrument wielded by some of our best intellects in the education
foremost men.
degree likely to compete with such a system?  I cannot better reply
quoted.
the stars around it, the ancient writer says, 'And God saw all that
' It is the body of things
  There is a
which the universe is compared to a watch.
with this comparison.
instrument, to be so satisfied with his work as to call it very good,
referred to the dial-plate in front and the chasing of the case
pivots of the works within--to those qualities and powers, in short,
  With
who would content himself with outward inspection.
say one severe word here to-day, but I fear that many of those who are
this outside and superficial way.
universe which science reverently uncovers; it is the study of these

The ultimate problem of physics is to reduce matter by analysis to its
manifestations, and then by synthesis to construct from these elements
  We are still a long way from the final
one of spiritual insight than of actual observation.
are still a long way from this complete intellectual mastery of
polities and the play of their powers.
miles in diameter, swathed by an atmosphere of unknown height.
ball has been molten by heat, chilled to a solid, and sculptured by
  It is made up of substances possessing distinctive properties
profitable to the child, others taxing the highest powers of the
  Our native sphere turns on its axis, and revolves in
  It is one of a band which all do the same.
by a sun which, though nearly a hundred millions of miles distant, can
examination.
light, heat, sound, electricity, and magnetism.
kingdoms of animals and vegetables.
human mind has conquered these things, and revealed the logic which
  Were they facts only, without logical
comparison with language.
with law; the facts are hung on principles, and the value of physical
intellect, both inductively and deductively, along the lines of law
  As regards the discipline to which I have
more, is involved in the study of physical science.
it would be possible so to limit and arrange the study of a portion of
qualitatively the same as that involved in the unravelling of a

I have thus far confined myself to the purely intellectual side of
  But man is not all intellect.
would, I believe, be his proper nutriment.
thinks; he is receptive of the sublime and beautiful as well as of the
  Indeed, I believe that even the intellectual action of a
undercurrent of the emotions.
moral and emotional from the intellectual.
himself, and he will, if I mistake not, find that in nine cases out of
intellect into action.
of them imbued with the spirit of modern science--neither of them,
  These men
  I must ever
Carlyle placed me in my tub, even when ice was on its surface, at five
day's studies with a resolute will, determined whether victor or
  I never should have gone
men.
without them I should not have been here to-day.
ought to do in a way that caused me to do it, and all my consequent
  To
of pure idealism.
scientific worker.
summons, taking the liberty, however, of determining for myself the

And I may now cry 'Act!' but the potency of action must be yours.
may pull the trigger, but if the gun be not charged there is no
  We are creators in the intellectual world as little as in the
  We may remove obstacles, and render latent capacities
  The 'new
not to be created but brought forth.
missionary labour suddenly transform the savage into the civilised
  The improvement of man is _secular_--not the work of an hour
  But though indubitably bound by our organisations, no
only release to be brought into action.
world certain crystals--certain forms, for instance, of fluor-spar,
have a potency of light locked up within them.
potential has never become actual--the light is in fact held back by a
  When these crystals are warmed, the detent is
  I know not how
  For aught I
proper agent to be applied--the proper word to be spoken--to remove a
yourselves and sources of both to others.

the emotions.
their botanical ones--a certain lightening of the heart accompanies
one of these.
acoustical one.

their astronomical one.
horizon of the emotions open, and not to permit either priest or
  Here the
intellectual fight, have an irresistible claim.
work of science by exalting and refining the aesthetic faculty, and
culture complete.
these languages have so long exercised upon powerful and elevated
Roman mould to the end of time.

of the more earnest spirits of our day--the danger of _haste_ in
  We are distracted by
and which now excite in us a hunger and a thirst for knowledge not
  There are periods when the judgment ought to
absent.
science, but not so common as it ought to be elsewhere.
Regent Street some time ago with a man of great gifts and
  I
nor was I prepared to enunciate any definite views of my own.
turned to me at length and said, 'You surely must have a theory of the
'  That I should in one way or another have solved this
  'I have
  We ought to learn to
  We ought assuredly to pause before closing with the advances of
peace at the modest cost of intellectual life.

present at all events such men must learn self-trust.
and freshness of their own Jives and utterances they must awaken life
  The hopes and terrors which influenced our fathers are
strength of man's moral nature.
a great part to play in the future culture of the world.
he rightly understands his mission, and does not flinch from the tonic
that heightening and brightening of life which so many of us need.
him it is given for a long time to come to fill those shores which the
  Void of offence to
become the illustrator and interpreter of that Power which as
       'Jehovah, Jove, or Lord,'
has hitherto filled and strengthened the human heart.

health.
have risen to any eminence--might have made great discoveries, written
neglect of this point have come to nothing.
oarsman in a rotten boat; what can he do there but by the very force
timbers of your boat, and avoid all practices likely to introduce
  And this is not to be
the formation of _habits_.
its strength in order to crush the special temptation.
formation of right habits is essential to your permanent security.
They diminish your chance of falling when assailed, and they augment




********************
    If thou would'st know the mystic song
    Aloft, abroad, the paean swells,
    To the open ear it sings
    Of tendency through endless ages
    Of rounded worlds, of space and time,
    Of chemic matter, force and form,

    Dissolving all that fixture is,
    And solid nature to a dream.



    Im Kreis das All am Finger laufen liesse
    Natur in Sich, Sich in Natur zu hegen.


*****
VIII.

[Footnote: Discourse delivered before the British Association at
]
'Lastly, physical investigation, more than anything besides, helps to
wondrous faculty, which, left to ramble uncontrolled, leads us astray
shadows; but which, properly controlled by experience and reflection,
instrument of discovery in Science, without the aid of which Newton
earths and alkalies, nor would Columbus have found another
'--Address to the Royal Society by its President Sir

I carried with me to the Alps this year the burden of this evening's
  Save from memory I had no direct aid upon the mountains; but to
indirectly the intellect and will, I took with me four works,
on 'Logic' recently published by Mr.
  In Goethe, so
as it broke itself in vain against the philosophy of Newton.
 Bain
with a dry light, but exhibiting at times a flush of emotional
humanity.
condition.
be alone, and the sorrows of thought are more patiently borne when we
  From certain
 Bain was no stranger to
  Speaking for example of the ebb of intellectual force,
 Bain says: 'The
pain of conflict and the debility of indecision.
them the true ring of personal experience.
investigator is periodic.
wrestles with it, and exhausts, it may be, both himself and it for the
  He breathes a space, and then renews the struggle in
  Now this period of halting between two investigations
  It is often a period of doubt and
  'The uncertainty where to look for
debility of indecision.
equip myself for the hour and the ordeal that are now come.


relations of space, or in the mental grouping of bodies in space; and,
the reception of physical conceptions.
your part, the wish gradually grew within me to trace, and to enable
and Colour.
mere observation, into a region where things are intellectually
action.

right in affirming that we cannot transcend experience: we can, at all
  We can magnify,
for purposes entirely new.
habitually form mental images of the ultra-sensible.
even in science who regard Imagination as a faculty to be feared and
  They have observed its action in weak
  But they might
the use of steam.
upon, Imagination becomes the architect of physical theory.
passage from a falling apple to a falling moon was an act of the
have been traced to their foundations.
the constructive imagination of Dalton formed the atomic theory.
was richly endowed with the imaginative faculty, while with Faraday
his experiments.
referred in great part to the stimulus of his imagination.
men fight shy of the word because of its ultra-scientific
our knowledge of nature would be a mere tabulation of co-existences
  We should still believe in the succession of day and
from our universe; causal relations would disappear, and with them
whole.

scientific men have already made of this power of imagination, and to
make of it.
  Observe
  Each drop as it
of ring-ripples expand outwards.
by which this wave-motion is produced, and a rough experiment will
a second.
body plunged in the water, as the wavelets reach it in succession.
a finer motion is at the same time set up and propagated.
and ears be immersed in the water, as in an experiment of Franklin's,
  Now, this sonorous impulse is
second.
water that comes into play.
neighbour delivers up its motion with extreme rapidity, and the pulse
  The incompressibility of water, as
elasticity; and to the possession of this property, in so high a
ascribed.

air is its most common vehicle.
possesses the particular density and elasticity corresponding to the
feet a second.
water; the reason being that though the greater weight of the water
the liquid far more than atones for the disadvantage due to weight.
various contrivances we can compel the vibrations of the air to
waves, and we have also obtained great mastery over the various
  We know the
membranes, plates, and bells.
 We

the external physical processes which correspond to our sensations.

sensible experience.
exercised.
and rarefactions of the waves of sound.
and we believe as firmly in their existence as in that of the air
  But now our experience is to be carried into a new region,
  Having mastered the cause and
light.
nerve.
almost call it a power of creation--which is brought into play by the
  The legend of the spirit brooding over
  In the case
for the purposes of light, an adequately modified form of the
  We know intimately whereon the velocity of sound
  When we lessen the density of the aerial medium, and
  When we
augment the velocity.
elasticity, are the two things necessary to rapid propagation.
light is known to move with the astounding velocity of 186,000 miles a
  How is such a velocity to be obtained?  By boldly diffusing

Let us make such a medium our starting-point, and, endowing it with
with strict mechanical laws.
world of theory into the world of sense, and see whether our
knowledge and skilled experiment reveal.
varieties of these phenomena, including those of the most remote and
face to face with the truth; if no contradiction to our deductions
verification; if, moreover, as in the case of Conical Refraction and
no eye had previously seen, and which no mind had previously
mere figment of the scientific fancy.
and creative power, in which reason and imagination are united, has,
and of which the world of sense itself is the suggestion and, to a

Far be it from me, however, to wish to fix you immovably in this or in
  With all our belief of it, it will be
of change.
_as if_ the medium existed, the absolute demonstration of its existence
  Far be it from me to deny to this reasoning such
  Let us endeavour by means of analogy
  You believe that in society you
  You are, perhaps,
  What is your warrant for
as if they were reasonable; the hypothesis, for it is nothing more,
  To take an eminent example: you believe that
  Why?  There is no known method
intellectually to any other, so as to demonstrate coincidence as
  If, therefore, you hold our
reasonable.
cannot go.
on which both inferences rest, caused many respectable persons to

This universal medium, this light-aether as it is called, is the
  It receives and transmits,
  Whence does it derive the motions it conveys?
  By the motion of a luminous
candle, or the shooting out of red prominences from the limb of the
  I mean an intestine motion of the atoms or molecules of the
  But here a certain reserve is necessary.
chemists of the present day refuse to speak of atoms and molecules as
  Their caution leads them to stop short of the clear,
or any form of that theory, and to make the doctrine of 'multiple
  I respect the caution, though
  The chemists who recoil from these
Undulatory Theory of Light.
in an aether and its light-producing waves.
belief involves.
figure a series of sound-waves passing through air.
their origin, and what do you there find?  A definite, tangible,
  It may be the vocal chords of a human being, it may
  Follow in the same
same time that your aether is matter, dense, elastic, and capable of
  What then do
your imagination if it will accept a vibrating multiple proportion--a

  The scientific
cause of a series of aether-waves, a particle of vibrating matter
gives origin to a musical sound.
molecule.
definition without penumbral haze, is sure to realise this image at

*****

discourse, and of preventing either failure of knowledge or of memory,
over a bit of ground which is probably familiar to most of you, but
  The waves generated
different lengths and amplitudes.
of the individual particles of the waves.
vertical height of the crest above the trough, while the length of the
  The
classes: the one class competent, the other incompetent, to excite
  But the light-producing waves differ markedly among
  The length of the largest of
the largest is probably a hundred times that of the smallest.
force or energy of the wave, which, expressed with reference to
square of the amplitude.
the energy of the largest light-giving waves would be ten-thousandfold
 This is not improbable.
with a view to numerical accuracy, but to give you definite ideas of
  And
non-visual as well as its visual waves--I think it probable that the
that of the smallest.

produce different colours.
largest waves, violet by the smallest, while green is produced by a
  On entering from air into
sulphide of carbon, all the waves are retarded, but the smallest ones
 This furnishes a means of separating the different classes of

Sent through a refracting prism, the waves of the sun are turned aside
violet most.
white screen placed to receive them 'the solar spectrum.
speaking, the spectrum embraces an infinity of colours; but the limits
into seven segments: red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet.
These are the seven primary or prismatic colours.

the colours observed in nature and employed in art.
they give us the impression of whiteness.
is white; and, if all the wave-constituents of such light be reduced
will still be white.
it, is barely tolerable to the eye.
firmament is still white.
reflecting it upwards; and when we stand above a cloud-field--on an
proper direction, the sun shining on the clouds below us, they appear
  Ordinary clouds, in fact, divide the solar light
part, in each of which the proportions of wave-motion which produce

It will be understood that the condition of whiteness would fail if
quantity.

exact halves, then, to preserve the light white, the waves of yellow,
  In
quantities, but by equal fractional parts.
preponderance, as regards energy, of the larger over the smaller waves
  Were the case otherwise, the visual
our sensations.

by liquids, but when they pass from light air to dense, or from dense
  Now
  It
thin concentric layers, or shells of air, each shell being of the same
passing from shell to shell.
surfaces of all these shells, and their action would be practically
  And now I would ask your
  What must become of
surfaces towards the sun; they are so many convex mirrors of feeble
reflected from these surfaces cannot reach the earth at all, but is
  Light thus reflected cannot, therefore, be the

But, though the sun's light is not reflected in this fashion from the
the light of our firmament is scattered light.
cogent description could be here adduced; but we need only consider
hemisphere of heaven.
the direction of the solar rays, and even against the direction of the
be due to the rebound of the waves from the air itself, or from
  It is also evident that, unlike the
proportions which produce white.
excess of the shorter waves.
the first question suggested by analogy would undoubtedly be, Is not
solution of the blueness of the sky.
the light of sunrise and sunset, which travels through vast distances
light through a blue medium could by no possibility redden the light.

  In fact the
in so doing a dichroitic action.
light transmitted is orange or red.
exhibited between the matter of the sky, and that of an ordinary

By the scientific use of the imagination we may hope to penetrate this
  The cloud takes no note of size on the part of the waves of
  It exercises no selective
  Now the cause of this may be that the cloud particles are so
indifferently.
a ripple produced by a seabird's wing; and in the presence of large
waves of aether may disappear.
particles, instead of being very large, to be very small in comparison
  In this case, instead of the whole wave

reflection.
in our atmosphere, and set imagination to watch their action upon the
  Waves of all sizes impinge upon the particles, and you
the waves of the spectrum, from the extreme red to the extreme violet,

Remembering that the red waves stand to the blue much in the relation
small particles are competent to scatter all the waves in the same
  If they be not--and a little reflection will make it
of the scattering.
the wave, the greater is the relative size of any particle on which
scattered to the total wave A pebble, placed in the way of the
scatter a large fraction of each ripple, while the fractional part of

solar light white, its constituent proportions must not be altered;
proportions are altered; an undue fraction of the smaller waves is
light, blue will be the predominant colour.
spectrum must, to some extent, be associated with the blue.
not absent, but deficient.
in diminishing proportions, from the violet to the red.

undulatory theory to be a reality, we have, I think, fairly reasoned
the sizes of the aether waves, sown in our atmosphere, the light
our azure skies.
spectrum are found, and they are found in the proportions indicated by
  Blue is not the sole, but it is the predominant

Let us now turn our attention to the light which passes unscattered
  How must it be finally affected?  By its
more robbed of its shorter waves; it therefore loses more and more of
  The result may be anticipated.
transmitted light, where short distances are involved, will appear
  But as the sun sinks towards the horizon the atmospheric
particles.
blue, and even disturb the proportions of green.
light under such circumstances must pass from yellow through orange to
  This also is exactly what we find in nature.
reflected light gives us at noon the deep azure of the Alpine skies,
Alpine snows.
a medium rendered slightly turbid by the mechanical suspension of

Here, as before, we encounter our sceptical 'as if.
parasites of science, ever at hand, and ready to plant itself and
  But a strong
phenomena, probability grows like growing health, until in the end the
  The first question that
in the manner indicated?  No doubt of it.
the question to an experimental test.
but spirit will dissolve it; and when spirit holding resin in solution
particles, which render the water milky.
precipitate depends on the quantity of the dissolved resin.
cause it to separate either in thick clots or in exceedingly fine
  Professor Bruecke has given us the proportions which
  One
absolute alcohol, and the transparent solution is allowed to drop into
  An exceedingly
action upon light.
permitting the light to fall into it from the top or front, the medium
  It is not perhaps so perfect a blue as
sky-blue.
  London, and
through the operation of the same cause; and Helmholtz has
turbid medium.


though unacquainted with the undulatory theory, was led by his
with the darkness of space behind it.
bright yellow by transmitted, and a beautiful blue by reflected,
  Professor Stokes, who was probably the first to discern the
[Footnote: This is inferred from conversation.
Professor Stokes has published anything upon the subject.
a glass of a similar kind.
had a colour 'strongly resembling that of a decoction of
' Curiously enough, Goethe refers to this very
Rosskastanie, man stecke denselben in ein Glas Wasser, und in der
sehen.
 xxix.
 24.


  What artists call 'chill' is no doubt an effect of
  Through the action of minute particles, the browns
  By
established and the chill disappears.

  When
particles remained suspended, and gave a distinctly blue tinge to the
  The blueness of certain Alpine lakes has been shown to be in
  Professor Roscoe has noticed several striking
  In a very remarkable paper the late
locomotive, when favourably observed, exhibits at a certain stage of
  It is blue by reflected
  The same effect, as
 More
Killarney, the straight smoke-columns rising from the cabin-chimneys.
It was easy to project the lower portion of a column against a dark
 The smoke in the
latter case it was reddish, being seen mainly by transmitted light.
Such smoke was not in exactly the condition to give us the glow of the
 Bruecke's fine precipitate
strengthening the precipitate, you may render the white light of noon
upon Alpine horizons.
arising from coal as an illustration of the action of small particles,
instead of sending them to the eyes of the observer.

referred to, are explained by reference to the single principle, that,
aethereal waves, we have in the reflected light a greater proportion
proportion of the larger waves, than existed in the original white
  The consequence, as regards sensation, is that in the one ease
  Our best
inch in diameter.
light.
objects not exceeding in diameter the length of the smallest waves of
 [Footnote: Dallinger and Drysdale have recently
  1878.
microscope, therefore, we can test our particles.
as the light-waves they will infallibly be seen; and if they be not so
  Some months ago I placed in the
  The
 Huxley applied to it his highest
  He satisfied me that had particles of even
not have escaped detection.
  Under the
distilled water.
 Burdon Sanderson's 'pyrogen,'
filtering-paper.
particles is secured.
filtrate renders this at once evident.

hitherto done, the natural conditions of this problem.
generate, in air, artificial skies, and prove their perfect identity
unexpected phenomena.
are able to connect sky-matter, if I may use the term, with molecular
masses, on the other.
experiment suggested by some of my own researches, and described by M.
Morren of Marseilles at the Exeter meeting of the British Association.
Sulphur and oxygen combine to form sulphurous acid gas, two atoms of
acid.
strong source, such as the sun or the electric light, are competent to
 [Footnote: See 'New
 i.
call this, 'decomposition' by light; but it behoves us, who are
constantly before us the physical images which underlie our terms.
Therefore I say, sharply and definitely, that the components of the

room, and sending through it a powerful beam of light, we at first see

is observed, which is due to light scattered by the liberated
  For a time the blue grows more intense; it then
  When the
of sulphur particles, which by the application of proper means may be
 [Footnote: M.
supposing that a modicum of sulphurous acid, in the drying tubes, had
 A
furnished by peroxide of chlorine as proved by Professor Dewar.
]
Here, then, our aether-waves untie the bond of chemical affinity, and
and which therefore soon becomes an object of the senses.
first of all the free atoms of sulphur, which are incompetent to stir
  But these atoms gradually
until after a minute or two they appear as sky-matter.
condition they are individually invisible; but collectively they send
firmamental blue.
continue, in this condition for a considerable time, during which no
  But they grow slowly larger, and pass
longer elude the armed eye.
start with matter in the atom, and end with matter in the mass;

and produce the same effect with all of them.
some--probably in the case of all--it is possible to preserve matter
continual operation of the light.
minutes the particles constantly grow larger, without ever exceeding

Now when two vessels are placed before us, each containing sky-matter,
the largest particles.
light, when, as in our experiments, it is placed in comparative
  The
scattered light.
observation, made by our President, when he failed to distinguish the
please follow me.

  In two
not ceased to be azure.
other phenomena, pronounce it to be a blue of distinctly smaller
 Huxley.
particles, as already stated, must have been less than 1/100000th of

And now I want you to consider the following question: Here are
at the end of that time are demonstrably smaller than those which
 Huxley--_What must have been the size of
form of the magnitude of such particles?  The distances of stellar
any distinct impression on the mind; and the magnitudes with which we
  We
of the microscope are literally immense.

Sir John Herschel drew some startling conclusions regarding the
  You know that these extraordinary and
length, and 50,000 miles in diameter.
8,000 miles.
the sky, would certainly be included in a sphere 10,000 miles across.
Let us fill a hollow sphere of this diameter with cometary matter, and
  To produce a comet's tail of the size
into space.
and suitably compressed, what do you suppose its volume would be?  Sir
carted away, at a single effort, by one of your dray-horses.
I do not know that he would require more than a small fraction of a
 After this, you will hardly
the quantity, of matter in our sky.
earth at a distance which would place it beyond the grosser matter
Matterhorn or Mont Blanc.
blue firmament.
clean, and the sky-matter properly gathered up.
probable amount?  I have sometimes thought that a lady's portmanteau
  I have thought that even a gentleman's
  And, whether
entertain no doubt that a sky quite as vast as ours, and as good in
held in the hollow of the hand.

sky may be inferred from the continuity of its light.
broken patches, nor at scattered points, that the heavenly azure is
  To the observer on the summit of Mont Blanc, the blue is as
close-grained solid.
continuity.
 Glaisher will inform you, that if our
the earth's surface, we should still have the azure overhead.
Everywhere through the atmosphere those sky-particles are strewn.
fill the Alpine valleys, spreading like a delicate gauze in front of
  They sometimes so swathe the peaks with light as
  This year I have seen the Weisshorn thus
  By proper instruments the glare thrown
the mountain which it obliterated starts into sudden definition.
[Footnote: See the 'Sky of the Alps,' Art.
 sec.
 i.
Its extinction in front of a dark mountain resembles exactly the
  It is then the light taking possession of the
the definition.
moonlight it is able to exclude from vision all stars between the
  It may be likened to a noise, and

What is the nature of the particles which shed this light?  The
floating organic germs.
profusion has been held up as an absurdity.
they would darken the air, and on the assumed impossibility of their
light, an apparently powerful argument has been based by believers in
  Similar arguments have been used by the
triumphantly challenged an appeal to the microscope and the chemist's
  Such arguments, however, are founded

doctrine of spontaneous generation, or to the germ theory of disease,
atmosphere, we have particles which defy both the microscope and the
in multitudes sufficient to reduce to insignificance the Israelitish

*****
The varying judgments of men on these and other questions may perhaps
plays so important a part in philosophy.
the impressions made upon us by any circumstance, or combination of
  Two travellers upon
other having descended to it from a higher elevation, will be
  To the one nature is
two such different antecedent states are sure to differ.
scientific judgments the law of relativity may also play an important
  To two men, one educated in the school of the senses, having
school of imagination as well, and exercised in the conceptions of
matter, say 1/50000th of an inch in diameter, will present itself
  The one descends to it from his molar heights, the other
  To the one it appears
  So, also, as regards the appreciation of
  To one of
particles of matter; there is but a step from the atom to the
  The other discerns numberless organic gradations between
  Compared with his atoms, the smallest vibrios and bacteria of
  The law of
such persons with regard to the question of spontaneous generation.
amount of evidence which satisfies the one entirely fails to satisfy
expansion of the doctrine by Dr.
conclusive, to the other it will present itself as merely imposing a
 [Footnote: When
demolition would fall upon myself.
]
Let me say here that many of our physiological observers appear to
microscopic from the molecular limit, and that, as a consequence, they
  When, for
or as absolutely structureless, because the microscope fails to
without difference, because the microscope can discover none, then, I
  A little
in the question of germ structure.
homogeneous than any possible organic germ.
the liquid to cease contracting at 39 degrees Fahr, and to expand
microscope can take no note, nor is it likely to do so by any
  Place distilled water in the

none; and still profound and complex changes have occurred.
all, the particles of water have been rendered diamagnetically polar;
magnetic whirl of its molecules, the liquid twists a ray of light in a

Have the diamond, the amethyst, and the countless other crystals
Assuredly they have; but what can the microscope make of it?  Nothing.
It cannot be too distinctly borne in mind that between the microscopic
permutations and combinations.
the atoms are arranged, that tendency is given to their powers; so
and a suitable environment, they determine, first the germ, and
  This first marshalling of the
than that of the microscope.
the problem raises the doubt, not of the power of our instrument, for
elements which will ever enable us to grapple with the ultimate
 [Footnote: 'In using the expression
mean that any kind of living protoplasm is homogeneous.
though it may appear, we are not at present able to assign any limit
'--Burdon Sanderson, in the 'British
  We have here scientific insight,
  In fact Dr.
researches are a continued illustration of the position laid down
]
In more senses than one Mr.
scientific tolerance of his age.
his development of species, and he has drawn adventurously upon matter
  According to this theory, a germ,
  Not only is the
organism has there its special seed.
draft on the power of matter to divide itself and distribute its
  But, unless we are perfectly sure that he is overstepping the
or demonstrated law--for a mind like that of Darwin can never sin
cautious in limiting his intellectual horizon.
doubt in the matter, it ought to be given in favour of the freedom of
  To it a vast possibility is in itself a dynamic power,
  It gives me pleasure
towards the justification of Mr.
condemnation; for they seem to show the perfect competence of matter
heaviest strain that he has hitherto imposed upon them.

 Darwin, observation, imagination, and reason
certain length of the line of biological succession.
analogy, in his 'Origin of Species' he placed at the root of life a
organisms now upon earth's surface might be deduced.
hypothesis were even true, it would not be final.
would infallibly look behind the germ, and however hopeless the
  In this dim
augment his light by indirect incidences.
nature in the ages and the worlds within his reach, in order to shape
  And though
are not left entirely without guidance.
solar system, Kant and Laplace came to the conclusion that its various
a nebulous form preceded matter in its present form; that as the ages
detached; and that finally the chief portion of the hot cloud reached,
  The earth
hypothesis of Kant and Laplace receives the independent countenance of
the earth and sun.

probable, a desire immediately arises to connect the present life of
 We wish to know something of our remotest
  On its first detachment from the central mass, life, as we
  How, then,
freedom--a freedom preceded by the hard discipline which checks
in science and out of it, is dogmatism.
the meeting--willing to end, but ready to go on.
intrude upon you, unasked, the unformed notions which are floating
speculative scientific mind.
honestly, and undisputatiously, I am willing to do so.
occasion--
    You are ordained to call, and I to come.


Two or three years ago, in an ancient London College, I listened to a
  Three or
  The orator began
the very perfect organisation of the kingdom, and the possession of
period of civilisation.
rate of augmentation, its present thickness, and the remains of human
valley, and which teem with organic remains.
way he caused the idea of the world's age to expand itself
with the age usually assigned to the world.
seemed to be swimming against a stream, he manifestly thought that he
  He expected resistance in the
  But it was all a mistake; there was
and there a half-humorous, but unsuccessful attempt to entangle him in
  The meeting agreed with all that had been said regarding
  They had, indeed, known
with so stale a story.
clergymen, who were, I should say, to be ranked amongst the finest
and transported the conception of life's origin to an indefinitely

This leads us to the gist of our present enquiry, which is this: Does
inserted into matter at some suitable epoch--say when the physical
us put the question with the reverence due to a faith and culture in
antecedents of our present enlightenment.
question reverently, but let us also put it clearly and definitely.
There are the strongest grounds for believing that during a certain
theatre of life.
molten period, does not signify much; and if we revert to the nebulous
 Our
had condensed, until the earth had been detached, until the solar fire
gather round the planet?  Did it wait until the air was isolated;
descent of rain had begun; until the eroding forces of the atmosphere
until the sun's rays had become so tempered by distance, and by waste,
life?  Having waited through these aeons until the proper conditions
questions define a hypothesis not without its difficulties, but the
by the nobleness of the men whom it sustained.

hypothesis and another; and public thought generally will afterwards
  But, however the convictions of
and secular which commends the hypothesis of Natural Evolution to the
  For what are the core and essence of this hypothesis?
alone the more ignoble forms of animalcular or animal life, not alone
wonderful mechanism of the human body, but that the human mind
latent in a fiery cloud.
is more than a refutation.
farther than this.
position that, at the present moment, all our philosophy, all our
and Raphael--are potential in the fires of the sun.
something of our origin.
this unsatisfied yearning must have come to us across the ages which
  I do not
overstate or overstrain it in any way.
vagueness, and bring before you, unclothed and unvarnished, the

Surely these notions represent an absurdity too monstrous to be
  But why are such notions absurd, and
have previously spoken, may find its application here.
Evolution notions are absurd, monstrous, and fit only for the
were drilled into us when young.
presented to us in the rudest contrast, the one as all-noble, the
  But is this correct?  Upon the answer to this
  Supposing that, instead of having the foregoing
had been taught to regard them as equally worthy, and equally
self-same mystery.
with the notion of the poet Goethe, instead of the notion of the poet
the 'living garment of God;' do you not think that under these
different from its present one?  Is it not probable that our
might be considerably abated?  Without this total revolution of the
but in many profoundly thoughtful minds such a revolution has already
  They degrade neither member of the mysterious duality
the divorce hitherto existing between them.
words, their position as regards the relation of spirit and matter is:
'
You have been thus led to the outer rim of speculative science, for
  I
outspoken.
away contemptuously, nor that it ought to be denounced as wicked.
is to be brought before the bar of disciplined reason, and there
  Let us hearken to those who wisely support
whose name is legion, who try foolishly to do either of these things.
The only thing out of place in the discussion is dogmatism on either
  Fear not the Evolution hypothesis.
presence, upon that faith in the ultimate triumph of truth which was
overthrow it; if it be of man, it will come to nought.
fierce light of scientific enquiry, it is sure to be dissipated if it
  Trust me, its existence as a hypothesis
virtues to which the term 'Christian' has been applied.
solve--it does not profess to solve--the ultimate mystery of this
  It leaves, in fact, that mystery untouched.
the nebula and its potential life, the question, whence they came,
  At bottom, the
origin to an indefinitely distant past.

the uncertainty of their data, and they only yield to it a provisional
  They regard the nebular hypothesis as probable, and, in the
the method of nature from the present into the past.
uniformity of nature is their only guide.
physical enquiry, they have never discerned in nature the insertion of
  Throughout this range, the laws of physical and intellectual
  Having thus determined the elements
that curve into an antecedent world, and accept as probable the

Uniformity speaking of impossibilities in nature.
what they are constantly charged with saying, that it is impossible
  Their business is
be, but with a world that is.
unmixed with reverence, and according to methods which, like the
  They have but one
  They have but one fear--to believe a lie.
And if they know the strength of science, and rely upon it with
ceases to be strong.
to thought, which science, as now prosecuted, has not even the
  They have as little fellowship with the atheist
mind of God.
starry heavens, and the sense of moral responsibility in man.
his hours of health and strength and sanity, when the stroke of action
investigator finds himself overshadowed by the same awe.
contact with the hampering details of earth, it associates him with a
neither analyse nor comprehend.



********************

  Whose form is not like unto man's, and as unlike his nature;
  With human sensations and voice and corporeal members;
  And trace out with chisel or brush their conception of Godhead,
  Each kind the divine with its own form and nature endowing.

C.
                             Supernatural Religion, vol.

*****

IX.

[Footnote: Delivered before the British Association on Wednesday
]
 1.

questionings betimes towards the sources of natural phenomena.
same impulse, inherited and intensified, is the spur of scientific
  Determined by it, by a process of abstraction from
experience, but which satisfy the desire of the mind to see every
  In forming their notions of
add, our prehistoric) ancestors pursued, as far as their intelligence
  They also fell back upon experience; but
the warp and woof of their theories were drawn, not from the study of
men.
  To
nothing but a species of human creatures, perhaps raised from among
over the rule and governance of natural phenomena.
'Natural History of Religion.

the long run to satisfy the more penetrating intellects of our race.
Far in the depths of history we find men of exceptional power
anthropomorphic notions, and seeking to connect natural phenomena with
  But, long prior to these purer efforts of
philosopher possible; commerce had been developed, wealth amassed,
different conditions, and therefore differently informed and endowed,
  In those regions
eastern neighbours, the sciences were born, being nurtured and
  The state of things to
Hume.
  The
all of us, from our ignorance and uncertainty, may pay them the more
' Now as science demands the radical extirpation
with the growth of scientific notions, a desire and determination to
place natural phenomena on a basis more congruent with themselves.

attacked from below; theoretic effort passed from the super- to the
  It was felt that to construct the universe in idea, it
Lucretius subsequently called the 'First Beginnings.
again from experience, the leaders of scientific speculation reached
developments of which were set forth with such power and clearness at
  Thought, no doubt, had
completeness which it assumed in the mind of Democritus, [Footnote:
C.
attention.
excellent 'History of Materialism,' to the spirit and to the letter
history as Democritus.
through unscientific traditions, there remains of him almost nothing
immeasurably smaller significance spread themselves out at full length
' Lange speaks of Bacon's high appreciation of
excellent friend Mr.
Bacon.
a man of weightier metal than either Plato or Aristotle, though their
and pomp of professors.
the barbarians, who destroyed the atomic philosophy.
when all human learning had suffered shipwreck, these planks of
inflated substance, were preserved and came down to us, while things
'
The son of a wealthy father, Democritus devoted the whole of his
  He travelled
quitted the city without making himself known.
strife in which Socrates so much delighted, had no charm for
many words, is unfit to learn anything truly right.
have discovered and educated Protagoras the Sophist, being struck as
faggots, as by the sagacity of his conversation.
poor from his travels, was supported by his brother, and at length
before the people of his native town.
countrymen in various ways, and died serenely at a great age.

antagonism to those who deduced the phenomena of nature from the
  They are briefly these:
1.
  Nothing that exists can be destroyed.
All changes are due to the combination and separation of molecules.

 Nothing happens by chance; every occurrence has its cause, from

3.
mere opinion.

 The atoms are infinite in number and infinitely various in form;
arise are the beginnings of worlds.

 The varieties of all things depend upon the varieties of their

6.

and in their motions the phenomena of life arise.

philosophy, as now held.
finer atoms do duty for the nervous system, whose functions were then
  The atoms of Democritus are individually without sensation;
forms, but the phenomena of sensation and thought, are the result of

That great enigma, 'the exquisite adaptation of one part of an
especially the construction of the human body, Democritus made no
  Empedocles, a man of more fiery and poetic nature,
their combination and separation; and bolder than Democritus, he
wild speculation, that it lay in the very nature of those combinations
environment) to maintain themselves, while unfit combinations, having
  Thus, more than 2,000
day, not on the basis of vague conjecture, but of positive knowledge,
all events partial enunciation.
p.
]
Epicurus, [Footnote: Born 342 B.
] said to be the son of a poor
the atomic philosophy.
lectures in Athens, went back to Samos, and subsequently wandered
  He finally returned to Athens, where he
whom he lived a pure and serene life, and died a peaceful death.
Democritus looked to the soul as the ennobling part of man; even
  Epicurus also
of the moment, while the spirit could draw upon the future and the
 His philosophy was almost identical with that of Democritus; but
  One main object of Epicurus was
  Death be
  It merely robs us of sensation.
as we are, death is not; and when death is, we are not.
more evil for him who has made up his mind that it is no evil not to
  He adored the gods, but not in the ordinary fashion.
of Divine power, properly purified, he thought an elevating one.
he taught, 'Not he is godless who rejects the gods of the crowd, but
'  The gods were to him eternal and immortal
of any kind.
laws, the gods never interfering.

    Where never creeps a cloud or moves a wind,
    Nor ever lowest roll of thunder moans,
    Their sacred everlasting calm.

'
Lange considers the relation of Epicurus to the gods subjective; the
  We
depths, and fail to discern such a requirement.
and he never will be, satisfied with the operations and products of
demands of his nature.
these demands might be broadly described as a history of errors--the
fluent, which varies as we vary, being gross when we are gross, and
  On one
  He neither sought nor
the gods.
thought may be promoted by conceptions which involve no idea of profit
  'Did I not believe,' said a great man.
Carlyle.
things, my life on earth would be intolerable.
words is not, in my opinion, rendered less but more noble by the fact,
personal happiness hereafter, that prompted his observation.

yet to the lowest, to whom perfect clearness of exposition suggests
  They find comfort and edification in an abstract and
  To such people Epicurus, who spared no pains to
very account, superficial.
no unworthy occupation to spend his days and nights in the effort to
is mainly indebted for the extension and perpetuation of his fame.
Some two centuries after the death of Epicurus, Lucretius [Footnote:
C.
which he, a Roman, developed with extraordinary ardour the philosophy
  He wishes to win over his friend Memnius to
life to offer, although his object appears to be a purely negative
  His object,
and considering that men in his day trembled before every natural
was also in prospect, the freedom aimed at by Lucretius might be
  'This terror,' he says, 'and darkness of
shafts of day, but by the aspect and the law of nature.
the notion that anything can come out of nothing, or that what is once
  The first beginnings, the atoms,

atoms nothing can quench.
their denser combination, all things can be closely packed and exhibit
  He denies that matter is infinitely divisible.
come at length to the atoms, without which, as an imperishable
would be destroyed.

all-sufficient cause of things, he combats the notion that the
design.
rendered all manner of combinations possible.
persisted, while the unfit ones disappeared.
deliberation did the atoms station themselves in their right places,
  From all
unions of every kind, they fell at length into the arrangements out

'If you will apprehend and keep in mind these things, Nature, free at
spontaneously of herself, without the meddling of the gods.
[Footnote: Monro's translation.
('Contemporary Review' 1867) Dr.
the really sound and subtile observations on which the reasoning of
]
To meet the objection that his atoms cannot be seen, Lucretius
air act in the same way as the visible particles of water.
perceive, moreover, the different smells of things, yet never see them
  Again, clothes hung up on a shore which waves
though no eye can see either the approach or the escape of the
  A ring, worn long on the finger, becomes thinner; a
field; the street-pavement is worn by the feet; but the particles that
  Nature acts through invisible
  That Lucretius had a strong scientific imagination the
  A fine illustration of his power in this
are in motion.
lambs, which, seen from a distance, presents simply a white patch upon
invisible.

space, suggested the nebular hypothesis to Kant, its first propounder.
Far beyond the limits of our visible world are to be found atoms
once united, have been again dispersed--falling silently through
  As everywhere throughout
repeated also.
without end; and this, when considered, must dissipate every thought
  The worlds come and go,
particles.
Mr.
philosophy, which was severe and pure.


Still earlier than these three philosophers, and during the centuries
in other fields than theirs.
mathematics, and made his experiments on the harmonic intervals.
Sophists had run through their career.
Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, who ruined the Sophists, and whose
  Within this
'Elements' and made some advance in optics.
the theory of the lever, and the principles of hydrostatics.
was immensely enriched by the discoveries of Hipparchus, who was
  Anatomy had
that vivisection had begun.
Development of Europe,' p.
] In fact, the science of ancient Greece
operating capriciously through natural phenomena.
free from that fruitless scrutiny 'by the internal light of the mind
a knowledge of ultimate causes.
had introduced observation with a purpose; instruments were employed
complete by the union of Induction and Experiment.

intellect compelled, like an exhausted soil, to lie fallow for nearly
its fertility and strength?  Bacon has already let us know one cause;
thought, servility, intolerance of disposition, enthusiasm of temper;
 [Footnote: 'History of the
 i.
had their antecedents in the circumstances of the time.
other cities of the Empire, had fallen into moral putrefaction.
Christianity had appeared, offering the Gospel to the poor, and by
the profligacy of the age.
and the extraordinary exaltation of mind which enabled them to triumph
left traces not easily effaced.
vividness in Renan's 'Antichrist.
that 'building of God, that house not made with hands, eternal in the
' The Scriptures which ministered to their spiritual needs
  When, for example, the
with many the ultimate court of appeal.
A.
 400, would not deny the rotundity of the earth; but he would
no such race is recorded in Scripture among the descendants of Adam.
Archbishop Boniface was shocked at the assumption of a 'world of human
' Thus reined in,
  Later on, the political
powerfully depicted by Draper, must have done much to stifle

Whewell makes many wise and brave remarks regarding the spirit of the
  It was a menial spirit.
knowledge had forsaken the fountain of living waters, the direct
up to the remanipulation of the notions of their predecessors.
a time when thought had become abject, and when the acceptance of mere

moral, causes; while an exercise of the phantasy, almost as degrading
speculation.
Alchemy, the Neoplatonic philosophy, with its visionary though sublime
bodies, as hindrances to the absorption of the creature in the
  Finally came the scholastic philosophy, a
with the Christianity of the West.
result.
imagining he is making way, and find himself after hours of toil at
knots, and formed and dissipated the same clouds,' found themselves
 [Footnote: Whewell.

and which, to a less extent, he still wields, I would ask permission

When the human mind has achieved greatness and given evidence of
with similar power in all other domains.
found comfort and assurance in the thought that Newton dealt with
devotion of his powers, through all the best years of his life, to
disqualification, tended to render him less, instead of more competent
  Goethe, starting
discoveries in Natural History, produced a profound impression among
which he endeavoured to overthrow Newton's theory of colours.
theory he deemed so obviously absurd, that he considered its author a
language.

discoveries; and we have high authority for assuming that, had he
an eminence comparable with that which he attained as a poet.
sharpness of observation, in the detection of analogies apparently
the analogies discerned, Goethe possessed extraordinary powers.
elements of scientific enquiry fall in with the disciplines of the
  But, on the other hand, a mind thus richly endowed in the
regards the physical and mechanical sciences.
condition.
could not see the force of mechanical reasoning; and, in regions where
who followed him.

credit the Stagirite with an almost superhuman power of amassing and
side of the mind, in respect to which incompleteness has been just
  Whewell refers the errors of Aristotle not to a
facts: the idea of Mechanical cause, which is Force, and the
relations of space or emotions of wonder.
the word 'neglect' implies mere intellectual misdirection, whereas in
sheer natural incapacity which lay at the root of his mistakes.
physicist, Aristotle displayed what we should consider some of the
of ideas, confusion of mind, and a confident use of language which led
he had, as yet, failed to grasp even the elements of it.
words in the place of things, subject in the place of object.
preached Induction without practising it, inverting the true order of
from the particular to the general.
sphere, in the centre of which he fixed the earth, proving from
for near 2,000 years, that no other universe was possible.
notions of motion were entirely unphysical.
unnatural, better or worse, calm or violent--no real mechanical

He affirmed that a vacuum could not exist, and proved that if it did
  He determined _à priori_ how many
animals must have such and such parts.
philosopher, who is far removed from errors of this kind, remembers
for the jealousy of physicists as to the acceptance of so-called _à
  Aristotle's errors of detail, as shown by Eucken and
  He affirmed that only in man we had
than the right, that men have more teeth than women, and that there is

There is one essential quality in physical conceptions, which was
of being placed as coherent pictures before the mind.
express the act of picturing by the word vorstellen, and the picture
  We have no word in English which comes
proper limitations, the word answers very well.
its associations, and therefore objectionable to some minds.
with reference to this capacity of mental presentation, the case of
abhorrence of a vacuum, with that of Pascal when he proposed to solve

as a physical image; in the other the image is distinct, the descent
balancing of two varying and opposing pressures.


During the drought of the Middle Ages in Christendom, the Arabian
  With the
took the place of their opposites.
Christian peasant resorted to a shrine, the Moorish one to an
  The Arabs encouraged translations from the
  They turned in
as an unpardonable blasphemy all connection between the impure
'  Draper traces still farther
  He gives
particularly on Alhazen, who was the first to correct the Platonic
  Alhazen discovered
after they have set.
moon, and the shortening of the vertical diameters of both these
  He was aware that the atmosphere
its height at 58.
  In the 'Book of the Balance of Wisdom,' he
increasing density.
rare and dense atmosphere, and he considers the force with which
  He understood the doctrine
balances and steelyards.
  force, though
distance, and of making it purely terrestrial.
between the velocities, spaces, and times of falling bodies, and had
  He improved the hydrometer.
The determinations of the densities of bodies, as given by Alhazen,
  'I join,' says Draper, 'in the
will take pity on the soul of Abur-Raihân, because he was the first of
' If all
 Draper),
Europe has, contrived to put out of sight our scientific obligations
' [Footnote: Intellectual Development of Europe,'
 359.

ultra-terrestrial things, to the neglect of problems close at hand,
  But the reaction was gradual; for the
critic who went too far.
opportunity for the expression of opinion, the doctrine of 'two-fold
'theologically,' and the opposite opinion 'philosophically.
[Footnote: 'Lange,' 2nd edit.
 181, 182.
century, the creation of the world in six days, and the
affirmed by St.
admitted to be true as articles of the Catholic faith.
Protagoras uttered the maxim which brought upon him so much
meant to affirm men's differences to be so great, that what was
other.
truth by saying that one of two opposite assertions, made by the same
  It was not
double dealing with conviction; and it is astonishing to notice what
of this kind.

so express it, took more and more possession of men's minds.
Christendom had become sick of the School Philosophy and its verbal
haze.
the wilderness, 'Not unto Aristotle, not unto subtle hypothesis, not
of the universe, but to the direct investigation of nature by
' In 1543 the epoch-marking work of
  The total
followed as a consequence, and 'The earth moves!' became a kind of
  Copernicus was Canon of the
  For three-and-thirty
the consolidation of his great scheme of the solar system.
its blocks eternal; and even to those who feared it, and desired its
from meddling with it.
book appeared: it is said that the old man received a copy of it a few

The Italian philosopher, Giordano Bruno, was one of the earliest
  Taking Lucretius as his exemplar, he
the doctrine of Copernicus, reached the sublime generalisation that
accompanied by satellites, which bear the same relation to them that
  This was an
our present line of thought.
generation and maintenance of organisms, and duly pondering it, he
imitate the technic of man.
unfolding.
imposed upon it by an external artificer; by its own intrinsic force
  Matter is not the mere naked,
universal mother, who brings forth all things as the fruit of her own

This outspoken man was originally a Dominican monk.
heresy and had to fly, seeking refuge in Geneva, Paris, England, and
  In 1592 be fell into the hands of the Inquisition at Venice.
He was imprisoned for many years, tried, degraded, excommunicated, and
treated gently, and 'without the shedding of blood.
he was to be burnt; and burnt accordingly he was, on February 16,
  To escape a similar fate Galileo, thirty-three years
Gospels, the heliocentric doctrine, which he knew to be true.
Galileo came Kepler, who from his German home defied the ultramontane
  He traced out from pre-existing observations the laws of
  Materials were thus prepared for Newton, who bound

4.

philosophy, appeared in succession.
their philosophic tendencies were different.
Induction, believing firmly in the existence of an external world, and
  The
and his fundamental principle was much the same as that of Protagoras,
  I think,
  Only his own identity was sure to
idealism, in which the outer world would have been resolved into a
  Gassendi, one of Descartes's
out that the fact of personal existence would be proved as well by
  I eat,
conclusive.
proved was inevitably postulated in the first two words, 'I think;'
possibility, be stronger than the postulate itself.

fundamental principle.
eminently capable of bearing the test of mental presentation, vital
  Through fear or love,
an atom, because it was absurd to suppose that God, if He so pleased,
round particles, and light splinters, out of which he builds the
  He sketches with marvellous physical insight a machine,

to carry on the processes of digestion, nutrition, growth,
  It would be competent to
imagination and memory, to go through the internal movements of the
  He
its organs, as the movement of a clock, or other automaton, is deduced
  As far as these functions are
vegetative or sensitive soul, nor any other principle of motion or of
continually in the heart, and which is in nowise different from the
' Had Descartes been acquainted
water, as his motive power.
which exists between the oxidation of the food in the body, and that
  He would assuredly have anticipated Mayer
life,' deducing all animal motions from the combustion of this oil, as
coal.
circumstances of the time, the boldness, clearness, and precision,
a marvellous illustration of intellectual power.
Huxley's admirable 'Essay on Descartes.
]
During the Middle Ages the doctrine of atoms had to all appearance
  It probably held its ground among
world was prepared to hear of it with tolerance.
1348, it received distinct expression.
immediately followed; and, thus discouraged, it slumbered till the
of Hobbes of Malmesbury, the orthodox Catholic provost of Digne,
  But, before stating his relation to the Epicurean doctrine,
of the general introduction of monotheism among European nations.

intelligent power by contemplation of the works of Nature, they could
bestowed existence and order on this vast machine, and adjusted all
' Referring to the condition of the
world with thousands of beings whose caprices are incalculable, Lange
those of science, which proceeds on the assumption of never-changing
  'But,' he continues, with characteristic
the universe, has been seized, the connection of things in accordance
necessary consequence of the assumption.
wheels in motion, and know, or believe, that they are all driven by
action of every part of which is determined by the plan of the whole.
So much being assumed, it follows that I may investigate the structure
  For the time
' In
and at the end of every lever, the action of the machine would be
  But the actions of all its
these being brought into play by a single motive power, then though
machinery which it sets in motion.
relation of Nature to its Author, which seems perfectly acceptable to
  Newton and Boyle
Goethe rejected it with vehemence, and the same repugnance to
 [Footnote: Boyle's model of the
  Goethe,

     Natur in sich, sich in Natur zu hegen.

 v.

throughout history, great writers ranging themselves sometimes on the
  Men of warm feelings, and minds
satisfaction, therefore, is rather ethical than logical, lean to the
precise and more mechanical bias which seeks the satisfaction of the
  Some form of pantheism was usually adopted by the one,
men, was often assumed by the other.
is hardly to be ranked with either.
as the great first cause, he immediately dropped the idea, applied the
phenomena.
doctrine and of life.

did not know the true religion.
rewarded nor punished, and he adored them purely in consequence of
child, instead of the fear of the slave.
be corrected, and the body of his truth retained.
proceeds, as any heathen might have done, to build up the world, and
  God, who created earth
number of atoms, which constituted the seed of all things.
that series of combinations and decompositions which now goes on, and
  The principle of every change resides
  In artificial productions the moving principle is
within, being the most active and mobile part of the material itself.
Thus this bold ecclesiastic, without incurring the censure of the
 Darwin.
of mind which caused him to detach the Creator from his universe, led
ascribes an influence so large as to render the soul almost
  The aberrations of reason were, in his view, an affair
  Mental disease is brain disease; but then the
  The

It may be more than a mere result of education, connecting itself,
idea of Gassendi, above enunciated, is substantially the same as that
lecture delivered by him at Bradford in 1873.
philosophers, the atoms, if I understand aright, are prepared
subsequent interaction all the phenomena of the material world.
seems to be this difference, however, between Gassendi and Maxwell.
The one postulates, the other infers his first cause.
'manufactured articles,' as he calls the atoms, Professor Maxwell
philosophic heights considered inaccessible by Kant, and to take the

Accepting here the leadership of Kant, I doubt the legitimacy of
which his lecture concludes.
of eloquence in his description of the steadfastness of the atoms:
do not at length destroy, all the arrangements and dimensions of the
  But though in the course of ages
ancient systems may be dissolved and new systems evolved out of their
foundation stones of the material universe--remain unbroken and
'
The atomic doctrine, in whole or in part, was entertained by Bacon,
the chemical law of multiple proportions enabled Dalton to confer upon
  In our day there are secessions from
  Loschmidt, Stoney, and Sir
rather to fix the limits between which their sizes lie; while the
illustrate the present hold of the doctrine upon the foremost
  In fact, it may be doubted whether, wanting this
of scientific statement.


Ninety years subsequent to Gassendi the doctrine of bodily
hands of Bishop Butler, who, in his famous 'Analogy of Religion,'
similar idea.
will repay us to dwell for a moment on his views.
sharpest distinction between our real selves and our bodily
  He does not, as far as I remember, use the word soul,
for many generations previously.
'perceiving or percipient powers,' 'moving agents,' 'ourselves,' in
  He dwells upon the
the mind, almost up to the moment of death, remaining clear.
refers to sleep and to swoon, where the 'living powers' are suspended
  He considers it quite as easy to conceive of
succession of bodies, the dissolution of all of them having no more
faculties--the faculties of perception and action--than the
impressions from, or making use of for the common occasions of life.
This is the key of the Bishop's position: 'our organised bodies are
' In proof
objects' for the 'percipient power' exactly as the eye does.
itself is no more percipient than the glass; is quite as much the
the glass is.
we do with glasses, the like may justly be concluded from analogy of
'
Lucretius, as you are aware, reached a precisely opposite conclusion:
to hear what he would or could urge in opposition to the reasoning of
  As a brief discussion of the point will enable us to see
of Lucretius to try the strength of the Bishop's position, and then
can, the difficulty upon Lucretius.


views, most honoured prelate, would offer to many minds a great, if
  You speak of "living powers,"
mental picture of any of these, apart from the organism through which
possess any faculty that would enable you to form such a conception.
The true self has a local habitation in each of us; thus localised,
moment realised it?  When a leg is amputated the body is divided into
might say in both; but not you, for you appeal to the consciousness
foreign matter.
true self?  If so, what do you say to the case of the whole body being
any portion of the true self to the severed limb?  It seems very
(and no one admires its sober strength more than I do), you never once
  You begin at one end of the
perceiving power.
instead of the leg, the brain?  The body, as before, is divided into
be appealed to to prove that the other is foreign matter.
of going so far as to remove the brain itself, let a certain portion
pressures and relaxations of pressure be applied to the soft
  At every pressure "the faculties of perception and of

once had the discharge of a large Leyden battery passed unexpectedly
existence for a sensible interval.
interval?  Men who have recovered from lightning-stroke have been much
of the brain, days may elapse during which no experience is registered
  Where is the man himself during the period of
man to have been unconscious, that he was really conscious all the
  In reply to
that superstition ever invented, if only so felt and so remembered.
do not think your theory of instruments goes at all to the bottom of
  A telegraph-operator has his instruments, by means of
system, which plays a similar part between the perceiving power and
  Cut the wires of the operator, break his battery,
connection with the world; but, inasmuch as these are real

  What is there,
survival of the operator when the battery of the brain is so disturbed

me with some force.
through such a change the most exemplary man may be converted into a
  My very noble and approved good master had,
jealous wife's philter; and sooner than permit himself to run even the
  How could
real Lucretius remained as before?  Can the brain or can it not act in
If it can, then it is a prime mover which requires only healthy
apparent need of your immortal reason at all.
immortal reason, by its mischievous activity in operating upon a
extravagance and crime.

are likely to flow from your estimate of the body.
brain as you would a staff or an eyeglass--to shut your eyes to all
consciousness, to the fact that a slight excess or defect of blood in
it our meat, and drink, and air, and exercise, have a perfectly
think, open a way to innumerable errors in our habits of life, and may
consequent mental ruin, which a wiser appreciation of this mysterious
'
I can imagine the Bishop thoughtful after hearing this argument.
was not the man to allow anger to mingle with the consideration of a
  After due reflection, and having strengthened
with him, and which includes the desire to give even adverse
'You will remember that in the "Analogy of Religion," of which you
and that I over and over again acknowledged and insisted on the
regards the whole system of the universe.
deistical friends, who set forth so eloquently the beauty and
but scorn for the so-called absurdities of the Christian scheme, that
difficulty found upon our side, quite as great a difficulty was to be
  I will now, with your permission, adopt a similar
  You are a Lucretian, and from the combination and
organic forms and their phenomena.
instance how far I am prepared to go with you.
build crystalline forms out of this play of molecular force; that the
are thus produced.
or flower might in this way be organised.
animal without sensation, I will concede to you that it also might be

'Thus far our way is clear, but now comes my difficulty.
are individually without sensation, much more are they without
  May I ask you, then, to try your hand upon this
  Take your dead hydrogen atoms, your dead oxygen atoms, your
atoms, and all the other atoms, dead as grains of shot, of which the
  Imagine them separate and sensationless; observe
  This,
  But can you
and from these individually dead atoms, sensation, thought, and
rattling of dice, or the Differential Calculus out of the clash of
which you speak, nor am I, like so many of my brethren, a mere vacuum
  I can follow a particle of musk
until their tremors reach the water of the labyrinth, and set the
of aether as they cross the eye and hit the retina.
able to pursue to the central organ the motion thus imparted at the
into tremors.

tremors things so utterly incongruous with them as sensation, thought,
  You may say, or think, that this issue of
flash of light from the union of oxygen and hydrogen.
say that it is.
which I now force upon your attention.
consciousness, the objective counterpart of which is a vibration.
is a flash only by your interpretation.
apparent incongruity; and you are the thing that puzzles me.
not remind you that the great Leibnitz felt the difficulty which I
death he displaced your atoms by his monads, which were more or less
integration of which he supposed all the phenomena of life--sentient,

'Your difficulty, then, as I see you are ready to admit, is quite as
  You cannot satisfy the human understanding in its
phenomena of consciousness.
inevitably split whenever it pretends to be a complete philosophy of
  What is the moral, my Lucretian?  You and I are not likely to
we see so much room for honest differences of opinion.
people of less wit or more bigotry (I say it with humility), on both
discussions.
the present day, who are not ashamed publicly to assume the "deep
theologic dogma.
Editor of the 'Dublin Review' presented to his readers the memory of
  I can only say, that I would as soon take my chance
his Jesuit detractor.
 Ward we have an example of a wholesome
] 'And
wrought as it has been into the constitution of our forefathers, and
insincere.
the unswerving faith that what is good and true in both our arguments
or false will disappear.

to be worthy of imitation.

his age.
favourite and general a topic of discussion, that, when the students
Professor, they at once requested him to lecture upon the soul.
the time of Bishop Butler the question was not only agitated but
  It was seen by the clear-witted men who entered this arena,

  He saw it, admitted
in his scheme of immortality.


Bishop Butler accepted with unwavering trust the chronology of the Old
of the world, collected from common historians, from the state of the
' These words
successors of today.
his time the domain of the naturalist has been immensely extended--the
the life of the ancient earth, having been created.
old conceptions has been relaxed, the public mind being rendered
sixty thousand, nor for six thousand thousand, but for aeons embracing
death.
palaeontologist, from sub-Cambrian depths to the deposits thickening
  And upon the leaves of that stone book
formed by the ink of history, which carry the mind back into abysses
Butler cease to have a visual angle.

was at one time active, increased to multitudes and demanded
  They were grouped in genera, species, and varieties,
  Thus
appropriated to it and to its fellows of similar morphological or
  The general fact soon became evident that
higher among the superimposed strata, more perfect forms appear.
change, however, from form to form was not continuous, but by
  'A section,' says Mr.
hundred feet thick will exhibit at different heights a dozen species
limestone, or clay, into the zone below it, or into that above it.
the presence of such facts it was not possible to avoid the question:
irregularities, this unmistakable general advance, being subjected to
purely scientific, or had it been sufficiently detached from
proved hindrances and delusions when introduced as factors into the
the search for a law of growth, or allowed itself to accept the
mechanic's bench for the manufacture of new species out of all

Biassed, however, by their previous education, the great majority of
appearance of each new group of organisms.
were clearheaded enough to see that this was no explanation at
a greater difficulty, to account for a less.
offer in the way of explanation, they for the most part held their
  Still the thoughts of reflecting men naturally and necessarily
  De Maillet, a contemporary of Newton,
notion of the modifiability of living forms.
Brodie, a man of highly philosophic mind, often drew my attention to
the pioneer of Charles Darwin.
 i.
pp.
]  In 1801, and in subsequent years, the celebrated Lamarck,
'Vestiges of Creation,' rendered the public mind perfectly familiar
species out of changes of habit and external condition.

Society a paper in which, to use the words of Mr.
distinctly recognises the principle of natural selection; and this is
' The thoroughness and
of his character, rendered him long ago a favourite with me; and it
testimony to his penetration.
 Patrick Matthew,
enunciation of opinions more or less clear and correct, showed that

 Wallace simultaneously, but independently, placed their
 [Footnote: In
 Herbert Spencer ('Principles of Psychology,' 2nd edit.
vol.
 p.
arisen by an unbroken evolution, and through the instrumentality of
' This was my belief also at that
]
These papers were followed in 1859 by the publication of the first
' All great things come slowly to
  Copernicus, as I informed you, pondered his great work for
  Newton for nearly twenty years kept the idea of
discovery of Fluxions, and doubtless would have continued to make it
track.
origin of species, and doubtless he would have continued to do so had
 [Footnote: The behaviour of Mr.
Wallace in relation to this subject has been dignified in the highest
]  A concentrated, but full and powerful, epitome of his
  The book was by no means an easy one;
read its pages through, or were competent to grasp their significance
  I do not say this merely to discredit them: for there
above the heat of popular prejudice, and willing to accept any
fact and argument, who entirely mistook Mr.
  In fact,
 Huxley.
nothing more admirable in the way of scientific exposition than those
  He swept the curve of
enriched his exposition with profound original remarks and
which a less compact mind would have spread over pages.
one impression made by the book itself which no exposition of it,
amount of labour, both of observation and of thought, implied in its
  Let us glance at its principles.

continually produced.
  No
its brother and sister; and in such differences we have 'variety'
  No naturalist could tell how far this variation could be
internal or external change, nor by the mixture of both, could the
constitute different species.
philosopher is to combine the conditions of Nature and to produce her
 [Footnote: The first step
  Experiments
incalculable value, which ought to be supplied to the science of the
]  He made himself acquainted with what could, without any
  He
observed every breed that he could obtain.
common stock, the diversities of these pigeons were such that 'a score
were told that they were wild birds, would certainly be ranked by him
' The simple principle which guides the
some variety that strikes his fancy, and the propagation of this
  With his eye still directed to the particular
reappears in successive broods, and thus adds increment to increment
effected.
the variation.
together until the required result has been obtained.
Mr.
with a tail developed in some slight degree in an unusual manner, or a
' Thus nature
exaggerates the deviation.

organisation of an animal or of a plant (for precisely the same
  is to some extent plastic, he passes
 Hitherto
conscious selection of man.
 Darwin's
' The number of living things produced
period or other of their lives there must be a struggle for existence.
And what is the infallible result?  If one organism were a perfect
conditions would decide.
 Here we have the
it offered itself to man; and those varieties which are least
to those that are most competent.
weakest goes to the wall.
over-production, transmitting the qualities which secured its
  The struggle
has been transmitted in excess, will triumph as before.

favourable to the individual, still more rigorously carried out than
not selected by nature, but they are destroyed.

accumulation of small inherited modifications, each profitable to the
  With this idea he interpenetrates and leavens the
  We cannot,
Darwin is here dealing, not with imaginary, but with true causes; nor
natural selection in periods sufficiently long.
increment may resemble what mathematicians call a 'differential' (a
obviously be produced by the integration of these infinitesimal

If Darwin, like Bruno, rejects the notion of creative power, acting
with the numberless exquisite adaptations, on which this notion of a
  His book is a repository of
  Take the marvellous
 Krueger, where a bucket, with an
  Bees visit the
other into the bucket, the drenched ones escaping from their
  Here they rub their backs against the
masses, which are thus stuck to the back of the bee and carried away.
'When the bee, so provided, flies to another flower, or to the same
and then crawls out by the passage, the pollen-mass upon its back
takes up the pollen; and this is how that orchid is fertilised.
take this other case of the Catasetum 'Bees visit these flowers in
long, tapering, sensitive projection.
sensation or vibration to a certain membrane, which is instantly
forth like an arrow in the right direction, and adheres by its viscid
'  In this way the fertilising pollen

It is the mind thus stored with the choicest materials of the
natural causes.
nature, not the 'technic' of a manlike Artificer.
flowers is due to natural selection.
themselves by vividly contrasting colours from the surrounding green
often fertilised, and hence most favoured by natural selection.
Coloured berries also readily attract the attention of birds and
giving trees and shrubs possessing such berries a greater chance in

With profound analytic and synthetic skill, Mr.
the cell-making instinct of the hive-bee.
it is representative.
less perfectly developed instinct--from the hive-bee to the humble
intermediate skill, endeavouring to show how the passage might be
 The saving of wax is
  Twelve to fifteen
single pound of wax.
must therefore be vast; and every improvement of constructive instinct
life.
is devoted to the gathering and storing of honey for winter food.

Melipona with its more artistic cells, to the hive-bee with its
  The bees place themselves at equal
the selected points.
intersection are built up with thin laminae.
formed.
representative.
perfect and complex, to the less perfect and simple, and carries you
infinitesimal change, and in this way gradually breaks down your
result of natural selection.

 Darwin shirks no difficulty; and, saturated as the subject was
weakness as well as the strength of his theory.
be of little avail were his object a temporary dialectic victory,
everlasting.
discerned; nay, he takes every pains to bring it into the strongest
  His vast resources enable him to cope with objections started
reader's mind that, if they be not completely answered, they certainly
  Their negative force being thus destroyed, you are
to bring before you.
resource, render Mr.

against him--not always with the view of fairly weighing his theory,
  This
  He treats every objection with a soberness and
surrounding each fact with its appropriate detail, placing it in its
as it was kept isolated, failed to appear.
trace of ill-temper.
strength of a glacier; and the grinding of the rocks is not always

there is an emotion of the intellect, incident to the discernment of
 Darwin.

his work, but the preparedness of the public mind for such a
  On this head, a remark of Agassiz impressed me more than
  Sprung from a race of theologians, this celebrated man
  One of the many
Mr.
  Rising
window, and continued there a discussion which had been started at
  The maple was in its autumn glory, and the exquisite beauty of
disturbance the intellectual action.
turned, and said to the gentlemen standing round, 'I confess that I
best intellects of our time.
thought possible.


In our day grand generalisations have been reached.
origin of species is but one of them.
and more radical significance, is the doctrine of the Conservation of
dimly seen--that doctrine which 'binds nature fast in fate,' to an
equivalent consequent, from every consequent its equivalent
dominion of that law of causal connection which, so far as the human

constancy and indestructibility of matter had been affirmed; and all
  Mayer extended the
instance to inorganic, and afterwards with profound insight to organic
 [Footnote: Dr.
regarding the conservation of energy in inorganic nature.
vegetable world, though drawing all its nutriment from invisible
force.
transformed solar force.
uncreative, all its motive energies being referred to the combustion
  The activity of each animal, as a whole, was proved to
  The muscles were shown
nerves, and then resulting in muscular contractions.
which messages fly to and fro along the nerves was determined by
equal to that of light or electricity, but less than the speed of

This was the work of the physicist: then came the conquests of the
every animal, and the function of every organ in the whole biological
  The nervous system had
and, at bottom, entirely mysterious controlling power which it
recognised more and more.
subject so profoundly suggestive.
with by Mr.
gradations, and asking equally for a solution.
grades and orders of Mind to be accounted for?  What is the principle
Reason?  These are questions which, though not thrusting themselves so
occupied many reflecting minds, but had been formally broached by one

With the mass of materials furnished by the physicist and physiologist
 Herbert Spencer, twenty years ago, sought to graft
greatly amplified edition of his work appeared.
occupied themselves with the beautiful experiments of Plateau will
of alcohol and water of the same density as the oil, are brought
  Something like a pellicle
immediately followed by the coalescence of the globules into one.
There are organisms whose vital actions are almost as purely physical
  They come into contact and
  From such organisms to others a shade
ever-ascending series, Mr.
  There are
the medium in which it lives, or, as it is often expressed, the
  Mr.
that between these two factors there is incessant interaction.
organism is played upon by the environment, and is modified to meet
  Life he defines to be 'a

In the lowest organisms we have a kind of tactual sense diffused over
corresponding adjustments, special portions of the surface become more
  The senses are nascent, the basis
Democritus recognised 2,300 years ago as their common progenitor.
action of light, in the first instance, appears to be a mere
to that which occurs in the leaves of plants.
becomes localised in a few pigment-cells, more sensitive to light than
  The eye is incipient.
capable of revealing differences of light and shade produced by bodies
  Followed, as the interception of the light commonly
condition becomes a kind of 'anticipatory touch.
continues; a slight bulging out of the epidermis over the
  A lens is incipient, and, through the
that it displays in the hawk and eagle.
are special differentiations of a tissue which was originally vaguely

With the development of the senses, the adjustments between the
multiplication of experiences and a corresponding modification of

The adjustments also extend in time, covering continually greater
  Along with this extension in space and time the
through the various grades of brute life, and prolonging themselves
  Very striking are Mr.
regarding the influence of the sense of touch upon the development of
  This is, so to say, the mother-tongue of all the
organism.
  The parrot is the most intelligent
 From this sense it
as hands.
tactual range and skill, and the consequent multiplication of
the basis of its sagacity.
more sagacious than hoofed animals,--atonement being to some extent
prehensile lips.
evolution of tactual appendages go hand in hand.
intelligent anthropoid apes we find the tactual range and delicacy
animal.
manipulatory power, but through the enormous extension of his range of
as supplemental senses and supplemental limbs.
of these is finely described and illustrated That chastened

 Spencer.
times exceeding vividness and force; and from his style on such
the Understanding are sometimes the seat of a nascent poetic thrill.

which at first requires even painful effort and deliberation, may, by
  Witness the slow learning of its
when each group of letters which forms a word is instantly, and
  Instance the
perfection of his art, are unconsciously co-ordinated.
musician, who, by practice, is enabled to fuse a multitude of
automatic manipulation.
hereditary transmission, we reach a theory of Instinct.
after coming out of the egg, balances itself correctly, runs about,
movements to definite ends.
co-ordination of eyes, muscles, and beak?  It has not been
benefit of ancestral experience.
registered the powers which it displays at birth.
the instinct of the hive-bee, already referred to.
which the insects stand apart when they sweep their hemispheres and
' Man also carries with
intellect bound up with it.
infancy and youth are probably less due to a lack of individual
organisation is still incomplete.
varies with the race, and with the individual.
outstrips the rifled bolt on quitting the muzzle of the gun, so the
  But the higher
  As regards
mental power in maturity; while the dulness of boyhood is sometimes

at school; but in his eighteenth year he went to Cambridge, and soon
geometrical problems.
preparing itself to be the organ of those energies which he

By myriad blows (to use a Lucretian phrase) the image and
consciousness upon the organism, the depth of the impression depending
  When two or more phenomena occur in the
to the same relief, and indissolubly connected.
the threshold of a great question.
himself of the consciousness of Space and Time, Kant assumed them to
our intuitions are thrown, belonging to ourselves, and without
  With unexpected power and success, Mr.
brings the hereditary experience theory, as he holds it, to bear upon
  'If there exist certain external relations which are
lives--relations which are absolutely constant and universal--there
constant and universal.
Time.
must be responded to by conceptions that are the substrata of all
  Being the constant and infinitely
of thought--the elements of thought which it is impossible to get rid
"'
Throughout this application and extension of Hartley's and Mill's 'Law
 Spencer stands upon his own ground,
experiences of the race.
experience to the individual is, I think, complete.
ignores the power of organising experience, furnished at the outset to
possessed by different races, and by different individuals of the same
  Were there not in the human brain a potency antecedent to all

experiences of the individual.
register of infinitely numerous experiences received during the
organisms through which the human organism has been reached.
effects of the most uniform and frequent of these experiences have
mounted to that high intelligence which lies latent in the brain of
  Thus it happens that the European inherits from twenty to
  Thus it happens
races, become congenital in superior ones.
of savages unable to count up to the number of their fingers, and
our Newtons and Shakspeares.


At the outset of this Address it was stated that physical theories
from experience.
the successive introduction of new conceptions.
attraction of gravitation was preceded by the observation of the


molecules are endowed with attractive and repellent poles, by the play
 Thus
 [Footnote: See Art.
Force, or 'Lectures on Light,' No.
]  It required no great
recognise in molecular force the agency by which both plants and
  In this way, out of experience arise
  None of the atomists
they had experience of gravity, as manifested by falling bodies.
Abstracting from this, they permitted their atoms to fall eternally
  Democritus assumed that the larger atoms moved
overtake, and with which they could combine.
empty space could offer no resistance to motion, ascribed to all the
consequence that under such circumstances the atoms could never
  Lucretius cut the knot by quitting the domain of physics
volition.

swerve from his own principles?  Diminishing gradually the number of
 Darwin comes at length to one 'primordial form;' but
have been introduced.
celebrated author and divine who had I gradually learnt to see that it
few original forms, capable of self-development into other and needful
voids caused by the action of His laws.
 Darwin thinks of
  But the
firmly associated with the creation of a few forms as with the
  We need clearness and thoroughness here.
courses and two only are possible.
freely to the conception of creative acts, or abandoning them, let us
  If we look at matter as
scientific text-books, the notion of conscious life coming out of it
  The argument placed in the mouth of
as this.
but partial students.
whose labours referred only to such accidents and properties of matter
  Their science was mechanical
  With matter in its wholeness they
mother of all' became the object of her children's dread.
reverently, but honestly, look the question in the face.
from matter, where is life?  Whatever our faith may say, our knowledge
  Every meal we eat, and every

On tracing the line of life backwards, we see it approaching more and
  We come at length
a mixture of alcohol and water.
in which we have 'a type distinguishable from a fragment of albumen
' Can we pause here?  We break a
  We continue the
it, though enfeebled, the polarity of the whole.
break no longer, we prolong the intellectual vision to the polar
  Are we not urged to do something similar in the case of
Lucretius, when he affirms that 'Nature is seen to do all things
Bruno, when he declares that Matter is not 'that mere empty capacity
who brings forth all things as the fruit of her own womb?'  Believing,
microscopes cease to be of use.
authoritatively supplements the vision of the eye.
engendered and justified by science I cross the boundary of the
invented in Belfast.
ignorance of its latent powers, and notwithstanding our professed
promise and potency of all terrestrial Life.

any form of life can be developed out of matter, without demonstrable
conclusive by many has been adduced; and that were some of us who have
testimony because it falls in with our belief, we also should eagerly
  But there is in the true man of
namely, the desire to have them true.
him to reject the most plausible support, if he has reason to suspect
  Those to whom I refer as having studied
'spontaneous generation' to be thus vitiated, cannot accept it.
know full well that the chemist now prepares from inorganic matter a
sole products of vitality.
structural power of matter, as evidenced in the phenomena of
  They can justify scientifically their belief in its
  But, in
point to any satisfactory experimental proof that life can be
  As already
ones down to the lowest; and it is the prolongation of this line by
conclusion which Bruno so boldly enunciated.
Pantheist,' not an 'Atheist' or a 'Materialist.

suppose, and I therefore crave your gracious patience to the end.
question of an external world,' says J.
 Mill, 'is the great
' [Footnote: 'Examination of Hamilton,' p.
154.
 Mill himself reduces external phenomena to 'possibilities
' Kant, as we have seen, made time and space 'forms' of
  Fichte, having first by the inexorable logic of
eternal causation which holds so rigidly in nature, violently broke
the mind.
']  And it is by no
  For when I say 'I see you,' and
what I am really conscious of is an affection of my own retina.
if I urge that my sight can be checked by touching you, the retort
I am really conscious of is, not that you are there, but that the

All we hear, and see, and touch, and taste, and smell, are, it would
the extent of a hair's breadth, we cannot go.
to our impressions exists outside of ourselves is not a fact, but an
Berkeley, or by a sceptic like Hume.
 Spencer takes another line.
With him, as with the uneducated man, there is no doubt or question as
  But he differs from the
represents it to be.
an outside entity which produces them and determines the order of

Progress in the Theory of Vision,' contained in the volume of lectures
consciousness is also dwelt upon.
mere signs of external things.
strongly against the view that the consciousness of space is inborn;
corn without preliminary lessons.
experiments are needed.

accomplished and deeply lamented Lady Amberly; and they seem to prove
enable it to stand, run, govern the muscles of its eyes, and peck.
Helmholtz, however, is contending against the notion of
organisation of experiences of race or breed.
process of evolution is the manifestation of a Power absolutely
  As little in our day as in the
  Considered
that life on earth is evolved, species differentiated, and mind

The strength of the doctrine of Evolution consists, not in an
this mode of proof), but in its general harmony with scientific
  From contrast, moreover, it derives enormous relative
  On the one side we have a theory (if it could with any
the beginning of this Address, not from the study of nature, but from
garment is seen in the visible universe into an Artificer, fashioned
act.
us, and all we feel within us--the phenomena; physical nature as well
cosmical life, if I dare apply the term, an infinitesimal span of
  And even this span is
  We can trace the development of a nervous
thought.

connection between them.
which the human mind cannot command; and the effort to solve the
like that of a man trying to lift himself by his own waistband.
that has been said in this discourse is to be taken in connection with

When' nascent senses' are spoken of, when 'the differentiation of a
these possessions and processes are associated with 'the modification
contact, or even approach to contact, is implied.
separated by an impassable gulf from man the subject.
motor energy in the human intellect to carry it, without logical

9.

interaction of organism and environment through countless ages past.
The Human Understanding, for example,--that faculty which Mr.
has turned so skilfully round upon its own antecedents--is itself a
ranges of time.
a claim.
understanding, there are many other things appertaining to man, whose
itself.
environment that sugar is sweet, and that aloes are bitter; that the
  Such facts of
rendered) are quite as old as the understanding; and many other things
  Mr.
to that most powerful of passions--the amatory passion--as one which,
whatever; and we may press its claim as being at least as ancient, and
  Then there are such
Wonder--and not alone the sexual love just referred to, but the love

history, and probably for ages prior to all history, incorporated
  You, who have escaped from
deride them; but in so doing you deride accidents of form merely, and
nature of man.
problem of problems at the present hour.
scientific culture as many of the religions of the world have been and
as some of them undoubtedly have been, and would, if they could, be
mischievous if permitted to intrude on the region of objective
the region of poetry and emotion, inward completeness and dignity to

Feeling, I say again, dates from as old an origin and as high a source
  The wise
demand, rather than of resisting it on account of errors and
  What we should resist, at all hazards, is the
elemental bias of man's nature a system which should exercise despotic
  I have no fear of such a consummation.
Science has already to some extent leavened the world; it will leaven
  I should look upon the mild light of science
gradually to the perfect day, as a surer check to any intellectual or
princes or the swords of emperors.
in the Middle Ages: should we doubt the issue of another conflict with


cosmological theory.
the domain of science must, in so far as they do this, submit to its
  Acting
fatuous to-day.
organism too rigid to adjust itself to its environment, must be
  When
exclusiveness diminished, things now deemed essential will be dropped,
  The lifting of the
intolerance are kept out, various modes of leverage may be employed to

Science itself not unfrequently derives motive power from an
  Some of its greatest discoveries have been
  This was the case
  Mayer,
modern generalisations, were thus influenced.
Lange at one place remarks, that 'it is not always the objectively
the fullest and truest knowledge.
brachystochrone reaches its end sooner than by the straighter road of
arrive at the naked truth more rapidly than by the processes of the
' Whewell speaks of enthusiasm of temper as a hindrance
  There is a
is to the lowering of this fire, rather than to the diminution of
science, in their mature years, is to be ascribed.
 Buckle sought
  He gravely
of the intellect would be poor indeed.

literature; but the statement, like so many others, arises from lack
  A glance at the less technical writings of its
show what breadth of literary culture they command.
modern writers can you find their superiors in clearness and vigour of
with every effort towards the bettering of man's estate.
Single-handed, and supported, not by outward sympathy, but by inward
which man in his totality demands.
rafter-ends indicate that on one side the edifice is still incomplete,
already irrevocably built, that we can hope for completeness.
is no necessary incongruity between what has been accomplished and
  The moral glow of Socrates, which we all
Anaxagoras which he so much scorned, but which he would hardly scorn
  And here I am reminded of one among us, hoary, but still
other of this age, unlocked whatever of life and nobleness lay latent
Maccabean Eleazar, and to dare and suffer all that they suffered and
the Stoa, and to have discoursed of Beauty and Virtue in the groves of
' With a capacity to grasp physical principles which his
has not been able to reduce to atrophy, it is the world's loss that
to science, and make its conclusions a portion of his message to
  Marvellously endowed as he was--equally equipped on the side
teaching us how to reconcile the claims of both, and to enable them in
peace.


  With more time, or greater strength and
worthy matters, here omitted, might have received fit expression.
there would have been no material deviation from the views set forth.
As regards myself, they are not the growth of a day; and as regards
without your consent, is rapidly surrounding you, and in relation to
  A hint of
ended; and it is perfectly possible for you and me to purchase
  The world is
who seek their shelter, and try to persuade others to do the same.
unstable and the weak have yielded and will yield to this persuasion,
  But I would exhort
accept, if the choice be forced upon you, commotion before stagnation,
swamp.
questions, and led you over what will be deemed dangerous ground--and
questions, science claims unrestricted right of search.
the point to say that the views of Lucretius and Bruno, of Darwin and
  Here I should agree with you, deeming it
 But the
them.
not urged to erect it into an idol.
understanding in the path of knowledge, and those unquenchable claims
satisfy, are here equally set forth.
Newton, but a Shakspeare--not only a Boyle, but a Raphael--not only a
  Not in each
 They are not opposed, but

And if, unsatisfied with them all, the human mind, with the yearning
which it has emerged, seeking so to fashion it as to give unity to
intolerance or bigotry of any kind, but with the enlightened
and that each succeeding age must be held free to fashion the mystery
restrictions of Materialism, I would affirm this to be a field for the
be called the creative faculties of man.
theme too great for me to handle, but which will assuredly be handled
shall have melted into the infinite azure of the past.



********************
X.

1874.

against myself a host of enemies; and considering, with few
the religious Press, I am forced to admit that the statement is only
  I derive some comfort, nevertheless, from the reflection of
must have good friends or violent enemies; and that he is best off who
' This 'best' condition, I have reason to believe, is

Reflecting on the fraction I have read of recent remonstrances,
is, but that which is to come--I have noticed with mournful interest
religion, and how potently by that 'nature' which it is the alleged
  From fair and manly
who desire my eternal good, I pass by many gradations, through
fervour inexpressible in words my eternal ill.
potent factor, we might expect a homogeneous utterance from those
factor, we may expect utterances as heterogeneous as the characters of
  As a matter of fact we have the latter; suggesting to my mind
people, is merely the accidental conduit through which they pour their
the case may be.
wherever possible, deliberately avoided reading, wishing, indeed, to
trace of irritation, far away from my side of a discussion which
many-sidedness of mind, if it is to guide us to even provisional

It has been stated, with many variations of note and comment, that in
 Longman I have
 A Roman Catholic writer is
  Startled by the deep chorus of
retreat.
  'It is too late now to
deformity.
Address of his was composed.
the solitudes of the Swiss mountains.
production; its every sentence bore marks of thought and care.

 In the 'solitudes'
purify my intellect by disciplines similar to those enjoined by his
  I tried, moreover, in
to permit no fear to act upon my mind, save that of uttering a single
other world.

position were so numerous, and my thought and expression so slow,
ideal, but behind the possible.
Address, I went over it with the desire, not to revoke its principles,
might give colour to the notion of 'crudeness, hurry, or haste.

Preface to the second issue of the Belfast Address: 'Christian men,' I
weakness and of doubt, as well as their hours of strength and of
variations of mood and tense.
assailants the only alternative ones, I do not know how strong the
be.
  But, as it is, I have
clearness and vigour that this doctrine commends itself to my mind;
dissolves and disappears, as offering no solution of the mystery in
'
With reference to this honest and reasonable utterance my censor
  Much as we dislike
tends to affix with links of steel to the name of Professor Tyndall,
'
Here we have a very fair example of subjective religious vigour.
my quarrel with such exhibitions is that they do not always represent
  No atheistic reasoning can, I hold, dislodge religion
  Logic cannot deprive us of life, and religion
  As an experience of consciousness it is
  But the religious life is often
this embodiment of the religious sentiment will have to bear more and
tests.
which belongs to ourselves.
and takes delight in feeling, that I am struggling, and he obviously
holding me down.
what mine are were equally real.
however, a mere delusion.
  I do not fear the
definition of the Supreme which he, or his order, would be likely to
  His 'links' and his 'steel' and his 'dread imputations' are,
cloud,' and they may be permitted to vanish together.


allegation remains, that at Belfast I misused my position by quitting
domain of theology.
  Laying aside abuse, I hope
  Is it not lawful for a
Did Kant, Laplace, and William Herschel quit their legitimate spheres,
experience, and propounded the nebular theory?  Accepting that theory
idea, the series of changes associated with the condensation of the
and the relation of all of them to the sun?  If I look upon our earth,
the process which made the solar system what it is, will any
Time was when a multitude of theologians would have been found to do
would have made a speedy end of the man who might venture to publish
  But, that time, unless the world is caught

As regards inorganic nature, then, we may traverse, without let or
worlds of to-day.
of science was theological ground.
the final and sufficient concession of theology; and, at Belfast, I
organic world, we must enjoy the freedom which we have already won in
  I could not discern the shred of a
the door of one of these worlds to the scientific searcher, and to
  And I considered it frankest, wisest,
without evasion or reserve, the ground that belongs to Science, and to

I have been reminded that an eminent predecessor of mine in the
things from that enunciated by me.
bounds of science at least as much as I did; but nobody raised an
  The freedom he took I claim.
I must regard as the extravagances of the religious world; at the very
entertained by the majority of our authorised religious teachers; at
may say it without discourtesy, of the attention of enlightened
quibbles of the Athanasian Creed; the forcing on the public view of
definition of the Immaculate Conception; the proclamation of the
chimeras, which astound all thinking men, it did not appear to me
the statement of more reasonable views--views more in accordance with
souls would, I thought, welcome with gratification and relief.

  The expression to which the most
the confession I feel bound to make before you is, that I prolong the
discern in that Matter which we, in our ignorance, and notwithstanding
opprobrium, the promise and potency of every form and quality of
' To call it a 'chorus of dissent,' as my Catholic critic does,
statement has been assailed.
past, I hope I may again ask my opponents to consent to reason.
of all, I am blamed for crossing the boundary of the experimental
  This, I reply, is the habitual action of the scientific
investigation.
electricity, all imply the crossing of this boundary.
'Scientific Use of the Imagination,' and my 'Lectures on Light,'
entitled 'Matter and Force' in the present volume I have sought,
incessantly leads to the ultra-experiential; that out of experience
their different powers of ideal extension consists, for the most part,
  The
alone, but is completed by fixing the roots of observation and
we are forced to fall back upon the picturing power of the mind.

abstract, constitute a sufficient ground for censure.
been something in my particular mode of crossing it which provoked
'
Let us calmly reason the point out.
was held by Kant, Laplace, and William Herschel, and as it is held by
  According to it, our sun
out of which, by condensation, came the solar system.
haze to condense?  Loss of heat.
That which rounds a tear--molecular force.
of which overwhelms man's conceptions, the earth was unfit to maintain
  It is now covered with visible living things.
are not formed of matter different from that of the earth around them.
They are, on the contrary, bone of its bone, and flesh of its flesh.
How were they introduced?  Was life implicated in the nebula--as part,
of a Being standing outside the nebula, who fashioned it, and
out?  As far as the eye of science has hitherto ranged through nature,
ever been observed.
special phenomena, though often made, has always proved a failure.
is opposed to the very spirit of science; and I therefore assumed the
nature which it has been the vocation and triumph of science to
further light.
life included, stand to each other in the relation of the germ to the
without a shade of indistinctness, the position laid down at Belfast.

definiteness belonging to the understanding, the scientific man has to
the earth.
knows best that certainty is here for the present unattainable.
refusal of the creative hypothesis is less an assertion of knowledge
not for ever, lie beyond us, and the claim to which is the source of
  With a mind open to conviction he
strenuously and so fiercely uphold.
the Book of Genesis, or some other portion of the Bible.
interesting, and indeed pathetic, to me are those attempts of the
  But the Book
  To the grasp of
potter's clay; its authority as a system of cosmogony being
its writer.
  In the former
it will continue to be, purely obstructive and hurtful.
its value has been negative, leading, in rougher ages than ours, to

*****
No incident connected with the proceedings at Belfast is more
a body usually too wise to confer notoriety upon an adversary by
  The 'Times,' to which I owe a great deal
the Irish Cardinal, Archbishops, and Bishops, in a recent manifesto,
their hands.
a different light; and a brief reference to these antecedents will, I
other doings which have been recently noised abroad.

after appearing for a moment, unaccountably vanished from public view.
It is a Memorial addressed, by Seventy of the Students and Ex-students
University; and it constitutes the plainest and bravest remonstrance

marked out for the students of the University; setting forth the
published a month before they wrote, did not contain the name of a

The memorialists forcibly deprecate this, and dwell upon the necessity
ardour for science.
years, become the chiefest study in the world; they are in our time

sciences which, as with the touch of the magician's wand, shivers to
  It is through the
on our religion.
the facts incontestably proved by modern researches in science.

gentlemen who, trained in the philosophy of Thomas Aquinas, have been
their divine science of Theology.

for the physical and natural sciences be not soon founded in the
to dangers which the creation of a school of science in the University
  For our generation of Irish Catholics are
determined that such inferiority shall not long continue; and so, if
it at Trinity or at the Queen's Colleges, in not one of which is there
'
Those who imagined the Catholic University at Kensington to be due to
the intellectual needs of the age, will derive enlightenment from
remains.
the Queen's Colleges, the memorialists add this darkest stroke of all:
advice, devour the works of Haeckel, Darwin, Huxley, Tyndall, and
out the difference between established facts and erroneous inferences,
deprived of a discriminating judgment to which he could refer for a
'
In the light of the knowledge given by this courageous memorial, and
did not at all strike me as a chuckle over the mistake of a maladroit
part of the Cardinal, the Archbishops, and the Bishops who signed it.
They acted towards the Students' Memorial, however, with their
  As one concession to the spirit which it
apparently as the effect of spontaneous inward force, and not of

The memorialists point with bitterness to the fact, that 'the name of
sciences.
cultivated minds wherever a Priesthood exercises dominant power.
Precisely the same complaint has been made with respect to the
  The great national literature and the
wholly the work of Protestants.
only is derived from members of the Roman Church, although the number

'what is the cause of a phenomenon so humiliating to the Catholics? It
the Protestants of Southern Germany have contributed powerfully to the
circumstances.
exercised for centuries by the Jesuitical system, which has crushed
' It is,
been most severely felt.
spirits, who have dared, without quitting their faith, to plead for
  The extinction, however,
individually broken and subdued, prepared the way, in Bavaria, for the
remarkable liberal movement of which Doellinger is the head and guide.

country, except Spain, the Irish intellect is beginning to show signs
pabulum of the Middle Ages.
Pope, Cardinal, Archbishops, and Bishops are united in one grand
Nebuchadnezzar recorded in the Book of Daniel.
image, whose form was terrible, but the gold, and silver, and brass,
  And a stone smote the
gold, were broken in pieces together, and became like the chaff of the

Monsignor Capel has recently been good enough to proclaim at once the
determine what true science is.
proofs of her scientific competence.
1456 it was regarded as the harbinger of God's vengeance, the
church bells of Europe were rung to scare the monster away.
additional daily prayer was added to the supplications of the
  The comet in due time disappeared, and the faithful were
eclipses, droughts, and rains, so also as regards this 'nefarious'

Both Pythagoras and Copernicus had taught the heliocentric
  In the exercise of
Pontificate of Paul V, stepped in, and by the mouth of the holy
decree:
And whereas it hath also come to the knowledge of the said holy
the earth and the immobility of the sun, entirely opposed to Holy
and received by many.
spread, to the damage of Catholic truth, it is ordered that this and
decree they are all respectively suspended, forbidden, and condemned.

sins upon Monsignor Capel, were it not for the practices he upholds
  The most applauded dogmatist and champion of the Jesuits is,
  No less than thirty editions of a work of his
  His
  He teaches
.
 that when God
passed by Himself, but orders that planet to move round the sun for
His pleasure may be.
questioning its favourite dogma, that every human soul was created by
soul, came from his parents.
universal power; it is from it, as Monsignor Capel graciously informs
not!
In the face of such facts, which might be multiplied at will, it
ignorance almost as extraordinary, to make the claims made by

Before me is a very remarkable letter addressed in 1875 by the
Montpellier, in which the writer very clearly lays down the claims of
  He had been startled by an incident occurring in a course
capacity there was no doubt, but who, it was alleged, rightly or
  'Je ne me
milieu de vous.
à soi-même un pareil honneur; il y faut être appelé de Dieu, comme
" Et pourquoi en est-il ainsi?  C'est parse que, selon le même
dans les usages, pas plus qu'il n'est dans la raison et le droit,
  Mais, si j'ai recu d'En-Haut une
de créance, me siéraitil de manquer aux instructions qu'elle m'a
m'a confié?
'Or, Messieurs, la sainte Eglise se croit investie du droit absolu
pas de la vérité fragmentaire, incomplète, mêlée de certitude et
religieux.
Fondateur divin lui a communiquée, comme la dot magnifique de leur
philosophique, moral ou politique, elle n'admet pas qu'un système
dogmes définis.
opiniâtre d'un seul point de sa doctrine rend coupable du péché
rejette pas courageusement avant de paraitre devant Dieu, entraine
'
The Bishop recalls those whom he addresses from the false philosophy
of the latter.
philosophie scolastique aura repris sa place dans la juste admiration
  Il lui faudra pourtant bien du temps pour guérir les maux
années encore, ce nom de philosophie, le plus grand de la langue
souviendront de la science impie et materialiste de Locke, de
  L'heure actuelle est aux sciences
contre toute foi religieuse.
'  Further on
  Poetry is
  'Les
ce qui sert le plus à la justesse du raisonnement;" mais si on
l'ordre moral ne parait plus pouvoir être démontré; et Fénelon a pu
geometrie.

'Comme le définissait le Pape Léon X, au cinquième concile oecuménique
conséquent, toute assertion contraire à une vérité de foi révélée est
" Il suit de là que, sans entrer
mais par la seule certitude de nos dogmes, nous pouvons juger du sort
anti-chrétienne plutôt qu'une conquête sérieuse sur les secrets et les
.
 C'est un dogme que l'homme a été formé et
  Donc il est faux, hérétique, contraire à
que l'homme constitue la septième espèce des singes.
.
de dire que le genre humain n'est pas sorti d'un seul couple, et qu'on


of amelioration--a steady advance on the whole from the lower to the
  The continued effort of animated nature is to improve its
  In man improvement and
which the errors of ignorance are continually moulted, and truth is
  It is the advance of knowledge that has given a
  Materialism is
considered--accepted if it be wholly true, rejected if it be wholly
truth and error.
its relation to thought and feeling, have profoundly occupied
  It is our duty not to shirk--it ought rather to be
for here assuredly our ultimate weal depends upon our loyalty to the
  Instructed as to the control which the nervous system
prepared, not only to mend their manifold defects, but also to
  Is mind degraded by this recognition of
  Matter, on the contrary, is raised to
remove it.


  From
items, which it would fain preserve: the recognition of a relation
 Harry Jones.
Out of the conflict of vanities his words emerge wholesome and strong,
who knows what practical truth means, and who has faith in its

I wonder whether he is less effectual in his ministry than his more
some definite understanding as to this question of health; to see how,
negatively, by the privation of that 'sweetness and light' which is
into life of cynicism, ill-temper, and a thousand corroding anxieties
  We fear and scorn 'materialism.
But he who knew all about it, and could apply his knowledge, might
  Not, however, through the
through the revelations of science, in connection with the history of

Why should the Roman Catholic Church call gluttony a mortal sin?  Why
the meaning of Luther's advice to the young clergyman who came to him,
be not that, in virtue of its action upon the brain, when wisely
To use the old language, food and drink are creatures of God, and have
  Through our neglect of the monitions of
  I might here point
society such control--disclosing the lair of the material enemy,
hopelessness which habitually tread on the heels of epidemics in the

Rising to higher spheres, the visions of Swedenborg, and the ecstasy
obviously connected with the nervous system and state of health, on
into the universal soul.
a condition of ecstasy.
united to God in eighty-six years, while his master Plotinus had been
 [Footnote: I recommend to the
 Draper's important work entitled,
  H.

)]  A friend who knew Wordsworth informs me that the poet,
object to assure himself of his own bodily existence.
consciousness such phenomena have an undisputed reality, and a
heterogeneous objective conceptions.
similar, because of the similarity of the underlying organisations.

always remain ample room for speculation.
Lucretian introduced in the Belfast Address.
not one of my assailants has attempted to answer it.
indeed, rejoice over the ability displayed by Bishop Butler in rolling
the Bishop's own argument that is there employed.
a new difficulty does not abolish--does not even lessen--the old one,
Bishop has said or can say.


controversy now going on: and which turns on the question: Do states
sequence, which give rise to bodily actions, and to other states of
to the physical processes going on in the brain?  Speaking for myself,
consciousness, interposed between the molecules of the brain, and
  The
of iron strength which claims for the brain an automatic action,
  But it is, I believe,
consciousness are produced by the marshalling of the molecules of the
me quite as inconceivable on mechanical principles as the production
  If, therefore, I reject one
  I, however, reject neither, and thus
Incomprehensible.
dwelt upon in these pages, I bow my head in the dust before that
and which may ultimately resolve itself into a demonstrable

But the secret is an open one--the practical monitions are plain
and woe, physical and moral.
the recognition of the claims of 'materialism' is not unknown to me.
I can remember a time when I regarded my body as a weed, so much more
moral and religious feeling--which, I may add, was mine without the
  The error was not an ignoble one, but this did
  Saner knowledge
infallibly avenge itself.
front?  Not so.
experience of those earlier years--no resolve of duty, or work of
in the life and aspects of nature--that would not still be mine; and
reward or punishment looming in the future.

readers; thanking my friends for a sympathy more steadfast, I would
commending to these a passage from Bishop Butler, which they have
  'It seems,' saith the
disposed to exert themselves with an impetuosity which would render
for some acquired moderation and self-government, some aptitude and
things.



********************
XI.
 JAMES MARTINEAU AND THE BELFAST ADDRESS.

]
PRIOR to the publication of the Fifth Edition of these 'Fragments' my
persons, to an essay by the Rev.
serious consideration at my hands.
attention claimed for it, and published my views of it as an
  of the 'Fragments.
here again refer with pleasure, to the accord subsisting between Mr.
Martineau and myself on certain points of biblical Cosmogony.
far,' says he, 'as Church belief is still committed to a given
refutation.
stars, and in and on the earth, before and after the appearance of our
Cosmogony recites.
things Religion must surrender to the Sciences.
emphatically: 'In the investigation of the genetic order of things,
' This expresses, only
Belfast.
stated in a few words.
the entire domain of Cosmological theory.
is represented by Mr.
it, are in absolute harmony here.

 Martineau would have just reason to complain of me, if, by
agreement between us is complete.
Session of the Manchester New College, London, on October 6, '1874,
affected by Modern Materialism;' the references and general tone of
previous deliverance at Belfast.
the exact grounds of this discontent.
the impression left upon my mind by an essay of great aesthetic merit,
which none but the pure in heart could utter as they are uttered here,
  The author appears at times so brave and
it, so imperfectly informed, regarding the position he assails.

 Martineau states with some
' They are two--'the
' It
from these two sources his religion as it stands.
word is said about the 'Sacred Books.
Science various 'books' contemptuously away, he does not define the
sacred.
 Martineau's use of the term 'sacred' is
  In his later essays we are taught that he
  He does not, however,
the term.
]  His references to 'Nature,' on the other hand, are
wholly abominable character of man's antecedents if the theory of
  Here also his mood lacks steadiness.
joyfully accepting, at one place, 'the widening space, the deepening
the rapid filling-in of the missing links in the chain of organic
very theory which renders 'organic life' 'a chain.
largest liberality for his sect, and avows its contempt for the
  But immediately afterwards he damages
  He professes
or certainly will be understood to treat, the Atomic Theory, and the
scientific thimble-riggery.

discord between scientific men where nothing but harmony reigns.
his celebrated Address to the Congress of German Naturforscher,
'What conceivable connection subsists between definite movements of
such primordial, indefinable, undeniable, facts as these: I feel pain
organ, or see something red .
.
inconceivable that a number of carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, and oxygen
and motion, past, present, or future.
consciousness should result from their joint action.

 Martineau 'freely'
  The act is due to misapprehension.
Evidence is at hand to prove that I employed similar language twenty
  It is to be found in the 'Saturday Review' for 1860; but
Bois-Reymond and myself, is furnished by the discourse on 'Scientific
here.
same line of thought is pursued in both, and that perfect agreement
  In the very Address he criticises,
 Martineau might have seen that precisely the same position is
  A quotation will prove this: 'Thus far,' I say, 'our way
  Your atoms are individually
  May I ask
hydrogen atoms, your dead oxygen atoms, your dead carbon atoms, your
atoms, dead as grains of shot, of which the brain is formed.
them separate and sensationless; observe them running together and
  This, as a purely mechanical
  But can you see, or dream, or in any
individually dead atoms, sensation, thought, and emotion are to rise?
Differential Calculus out of the clash of billiard balls?  .
.
follow a particle of musk until it reaches the olfactory nerve; I can
labyrinth, and set the otoliths and Corti's fibres in motion; I can
retina.
motion thus imparted at the periphery, and to see in idea the very
  My insight is not baffled
  What baffles and bewilders me is the
with them as sensation, thought, and emotion can be derived.
only a complete misapprehension of our true relationship that could
 Martineau to represent Du Bois-Reymond and myself as

'The affluence of illustration,' writes an able and sympathetic

diverting the attention of the reader from the essential points of his
power of conviction.
testimony; but the reviewer is strictly just in his estimate of their
  The 'affluence of illustration,' and

one thing needful--poetic fervour where we require judicial calm; and
willingly believe is meant to be, observed.

 Martineau tells us how the pupils of
under the assumptions (1) that the Universe which includes us and
world of our abode is the scene of a moral government, incipient but
the clouds of self and passion, take us into the sphere of a Divine
  Into this over-arching scene it is that growing thought
'
Alpine summits seem to kindle above us as we read these glowing words;
  At the close of one of the
']
 Martineau calls 'Divine':
and the sense of moral responsibility in man.
health and strength and sanity, when the stroke of action has ceased,
finds himself overshadowed by the same awe.
hampering details of earth, it associates him with a power which gives
nor comprehend.
of Mr.
  He,
to the region of Emotion.
 The
an external object of thought.
I see manifested in the Universe an objective form, personal or
manipulation.
regarding it; I dare not call it a 'Mind;' I refuse to call it even a
' Its mystery overshadows me; but it remains a mystery, while
seem to me to distort and desecrate it.

 Martineau, and hence his discontent.
professes to know where I only claim to feel.
contention good against me if, by a process of verification, he would
' But he makes no
  They remain assumptions from the beginning of his
  And yet he frequently uses the word 'unverified,'

what logical foothold does that scrutiny furnish, on which any one of
his picturing, is base and cruel: what is the inference to be drawn
responsible?  On a Mindless nature Mr.
torrent of his gorgeous invective; but could the 'assumption' of 'an
objectively a whit less mean and ugly than it is?  Not an iota.
man's feelings, and not external phenomena, that are influenced by the
  It adds not a ray of light nor a strain of music to the
  It does not touch the phenomena of physical
combats of the animal world.
emotion to the human soul, as represented by Mr.
  Beyond
petulantly--kicks away the only philosophic foundation on which it is

He twits incidentally the modern scientific interpretation of nature
  Let the new future,' he says,
tidings glad.
comfort of belief!'  My reply is that I choose the nobler part of
truth!' The gladness of true heroism visits the heart of him who is
  Besides, 'gladness' is an emotion, and
 Martineau theoretically scorns the emotional.
acquainted with a writer who draws more largely upon this source,
  'To reach the Cause,' he
here, He could be found there.
by the proper organs of divine apprehension, the whole life of
' That Mr.
should have lived so long, thought so much, and failed to recognise
instructive.
must assume, to Mr.
the greatest intellects and noblest men in this and other ages--lie at

In fact, it is when Mr.
scorns the emotions; it is when he is most purely subjective that he
  He pays a just and liberal tribute to the
  But in the light of Mill's philosophy,
subjective susceptibilities, have lost all support from Omniscient
'
 Martineau had given them any inkling of the process by which he
at an objective ground of 'Omniscient approval,' gratitude from his
  But, as it is, he leaves them
is incompetent to appease.

representations of invisible things into forms of definite opinion,
equivalent of our real faith.

frames of theory: as we put them together it slips away, and, if we
will, to unbind and sweeten the affections, and bathe the life with
thinking into a human pattern of thought.
mainly so because the man who utters it obviously brings it all out of
  But the 'hue' and 'pattern' here so
neither more nor less than that 'emotion,' on the one hand, and that
fire from Mr.

I now come to one of the most serious portions of Mr.
pamphlet--serious far less on account of its 'personal errors,' than
a witty and sarcastic tone.
materialist doctrine, which, in our time, is proclaimed with so much
  "Matter is all I want," says
universe.
 Martineau's intimate friends,
  I must therefore ask the
regarding atoms: 'I do not think that he [the materialist] is entitled

  The utmost he can affirm is the
he is in absolute ignorance.
Materialism.
alone, and I will explain the universe.
 Martineau continues his
you please.
metaphysical B], being homogeneous extended solids.
enough," his physicist replies; "it might do for Democritus and the
  The atoms must not
there are chemical elements; for how could I ever get water if I had
 Martineau
specified datum [where, and by whom specified?]--in fact, a conversion
by Mr.
what manipulation of your resources will you, for example, educe

  For the
 Martineau, and my
  The question, in my words,
does consciousness infuse itself into the problem?' And here is my
facts of consciousness is unthinkable.
thought and a definite molecular action in the brain occur
apparently any rudiment of the organ, which would enable us to pass,
  They appear
  Were our minds and senses so
feel the very molecules of the brain; were we capable of following all
such there be; and were we intimately acquainted with the
ever from the solution of the problem, "How are these physical
between the two classes of phenomena would still remain intellectually
' [Footnote: Bishop Butler's reply to the Lucretian in the
]
Compare this with the answer which Mr.
of his physicist, and with which I am generally credited by Mr.
Martineau's readers, both in England and America--'"It [the problem of
  Of course you understand
polarity; and now I have only to insist with Fechner on a difference
place, like the particles in an undulation; and there are the organic,
out.
manageable.
I], "seeing how careful you are to provide for all emergencies; and
pass from mere sentiency to thought and will, you can again look in
to serve as souls in little, and be ready, in a latent form, with that
so much prize.

 Martineau, 'you must observe that this
starting as a beggar with scarce a rag of "property" to cover its
 "We
and then, he ventures to believe, it will answer all demands, carrying
"  If the measure of
proposition would have had a real meaning, and been susceptible of a
 It is easy travelling through the stages of such an hypothesis;
piecemeal at every pause, complete your grand tour without a debt.

  On
 Martineau.
passing, that I share his contempt for the picturesque interpretation
  But the term
mental presentation, of attaching to words the corresponding objects
interior haze and soft penumbral borders which the theologian loves.
To this mode of interpreting nature' I shall to the best of my ability

Neither of us, I trust, will be afraid or ashamed to begin at the
  Our first effort must be to understand
beginning low down.
below the sea-level.
Sea, and halt upon the heated water.
the sun that heats it?  Answering for myself, I say that they are both
  I fill a glass with the sea-water and expose it on the deck
left a solid residue of salt in the glass behind.
invisibility--apparent annihilation.

    The sun unto the ocean paid,
the water has taken to itself wings and flown off as vapour.
whole surface of the Caribbean Sea such vapour is rising: and now we
a balloon, but by the mind's eye--in other words, by that power of
 Martineau knows so well, and which he so justly

Compounding, then, the northward motion of the vapour with the earth's
regions, obliquely across the Atlantic Ocean to Western Europe, and on
  Here another wonderful metamorphosis occurs.
Floating on the cold calm air, and in presence of the cold firmament,
of crystalline water.
upon the mountains in forms so exquisite that, when first seen, they
  As to beauty, indeed, they put the work
the abstractions of the geometer.
Without presuming to dogmatise, I answer for myself in the

Still, a formative power has obviously here come into play which did
  The question
the proper conditions of temperature to bring it into action?  Again I
  I am, however, quite willing to
 Martineau the alternative hypothesis, that an
escape from the liquid state.
then I should demand of him an immediate exercise of that
can never dispense.
in?  Did it enter at once or by degrees; perfect from the first, or
handiwork?  I should also ask whether it is localised or diffused?
water in their places as soon as the proper temperature has set in? or
latter, then the soul has the shape of the crystal; but if the former,
  Has it legs or arms?  If not,
appliances can act so perfectly the part of a builder?  (I insist on
unmeaning words.
before it joined the crystal?  What becomes of it when the crystal is
can exercise its vocation?  Finally, is the problem before us in any
probable that, after a full discussion of the question, Mr.
would agree with me in ascribing the building power displayed in the
  At all events, I should
any one unmannerly who would denounce me for rejecting this notion of
'
But then what an astonishing addition is here made to the powers of
such a power was locked up in a drop of water?  All that we needed to

over one another.
than this, we should have ignorantly defrauded it of an intrinsic
utmost degree of refinement, is incompetent to imitate.
invite Mr.
fictitious bank deposit becomes under these circumstances.
'account current' of matter receives nothing at my hands which could
  If, then, 'Democritus and the
to belong to it, they were clearly wrong, and Mr.
of twitting me with my departure from them, ought rather to applaud me
 [Footnote: Definition implies previous
modification as knowledge of the object increases.
knowledge has radically changed our conceptions of the luminiferous

 Martineau's conceptions of matter are doomed to
]
The reader of my small contributions to the literature which deals
noticed how frequently I quote Mr.
  I do so mainly because in
entirely undaunted by the discoveries of Science, past, present, or
  In his case Poetry, with the joy of a bacchanal, takes
laughter.
transmuted into the finer forms and warmer hues of an ideal world.
present theme is touched upon in the lines--
    The journeying atoms, primordial wholes

As regards veracity and insight these few words outweigh, in my
 Martineau in those
and speaks so wittily of atomic polarity.
notion of polarity--this 'drawing' and 'driving'--this attraction and
Crystallisation as a Bushman before the phenomena of the Solar System.
The genesis and growth of the notion I have endeavoured to make clear
published in this volume.

  A Sunday or two ago I stood
  On the
life with the surrounding vegetation.
friendly soil, and this was the result of their interaction.
the acorn?  what the earth?  and what the sun, without whose heat and
however healthy the seed?  I answer for myself as before--all
' And the heat and light which here play so potent a part are
  By taking something much lower
more nearly to the case of crystallisation already discussed; but this

If, instead of conceding the sufficiency of matter here, Mr.
should fly to the hypothesis of a vegetative soul, all the questions
  I would
will make to them.
principle of life into the tree?' I say, in answer, that our present
it?  Is there anything besides matter in the tree?  If so, what,
 Martineau may have begun by this time to discern
Vorstellungs-faehigkeit demands.
soul to be presented to the mind?  where did it flourish before the
planks, or consumed in fire?
Possibly Mr.
as untenable and as useless as I do.
tree be conceded to pure matter, what an amazing expansion of our
of the acorn, of the earth, and of the solar light and heat--was ever
those swaying boughs and whispering leaves, from the interaction of
call life.
the wonder of the tree; nay, I should not be surprised if, in the
Mr.

Consider it for a moment.
Wheatstone, where the music of a piano is transferred from its
succession, and poured out at a distance from the instrument.
strings of the piano vibrate, not singly, but ten at a time.
string subdivides, yielding not one note, but a dozen.
vibrations and subvibrations are crowded together into a bit of deal
  Yet no note is
 Each vibration asserts its individual rights; and all are, at
the distant end of the rod presses.
seeks to realise the motions of that rod as the music flows through
  I turn to my tree and observe its roots, its trunk, its branches,
  As the rod conveys the music, and yields it up to the
shocks and pulses and other vital actions--which eventually emerge in
  I went some time ago through the
  He had ferns from Ceylon, the branches of
smooth, and cylindrical--often leafless for a foot or more.
the end of every one of them the unsightly twig unlocked the exuberant
large enough to fill the arms.
the wonderful: we are conscious of a music subtler than that of the
Mr.
leaves.
every leaf--their form and texture--lie, like the music in the rod, in
so.
 Martineau weeps for' the beauty of the flower fading into a
' I care not whether it comes to me through necessity or
  I see what he sees
  To me, as to him, not even Solomon in all

I have spoken above as if the assumption of a soul would save Mr.
Martineau from the inconsistency of crediting pure matter with the
  This,
proved that the soul assumed is not itself matter.
learnt from Dr.
matter.
would find himself in very orthodox company.
says Fauste, a famous French bishop of the fifth century, 'is matter.
The soul occupies a place; it is enclosed in a body; it quits the body
Lazarus; the distinction between Hell and Heaven, between eternal
occupy a place and are corporeal.
'
conceptions regarding the soul.
says, 'is evident from the evangelists.
expressly pictured as suffering in hell; it is placed in the middle of
water at the hands of a happier soul.
Tertullian, 'all this would be without meaning.
foregoing extracts, which M.
benefit of the Bishop of Orleans, are taken from the sixth Lecture of

  'I could multiply,' continues M.
infinity, and they prove that in the first centuries of our era the
dominant.
 Moriarty, and the synod which he recently addressed,
 Their boasted succession from
more 'brutal' than any ever enunciated by me.

vapour, and the snow-flake, and at organic nature as represented by
  That same sun which warmed the water and
tree.
nutrition, separates its nutritive from its non-nutritive portions,

tree is traversed by its sap, the cells are formed, the woody fibre is
eye, but a million-fold more so to microscopic vision.
consciousness mix in any way with these processes?  No man can tell.
Our only ground for a negative conclusion is the absence of those
  But
  In the greenhouses of Kew we may
promptly as the human fingers themselves; and while there Dr.
will tell us of the wondrous fly-catching and fly-devouring power of
  No man can say that the feelings of the animal are not
  At
unconscious; for the vegetable shades into the animal by such fine
begins.

observe what our senses, armed with the aids furnished by Science,
  The evidences as to consciousness
weigh them.

consciousness be the same to a being with our capacities indefinitely
the mineral world, responsive to the proper irritants, the response
in virtue of their magnitude, appeal to our weak powers of

Our conclusion, however, must be based, not on powers that we imagine,
  What do they reveal?  As the earth
world, so does the latter, which contains no constituent not found in
  Mixed with
constitutes, in the long run, the sole sustenance of the animal.
Animals may be divided into two classes, the first of which can
enough to cope with its most refractory parts; the second class use
portions have been extracted and stored up by the first.
neither class have we an atom newly created.
to say, a distillation through the vegetable world from inorganic

From this point of view all three worlds would constitute a unity, in
  Nor am I anxious to shut
part and function of a Higher Life, as the living moving blood is
  I resist no such idea as long as it is
  Left for the human mind freely to operate
inner force disappears, and the outward yoke of a usurping hierarchy

The problem before us is, at all events, capable of definite
  We have on the one hand strong grounds for concluding that
  We now find it not only swathed by
things.
as unattainable here as Bishop Butler held it to be in matters of
mind is forced to take a side.
recognises unbroken causal connection between the past and the
it elements of life, which grouped themselves into their present forms
  The difficulty and reluctance encountered by
conception obtained a prior footing in the human mind.
depend upon reasoning alone, it could not hold its ground for an hour
  But it is warmed into life and strength by
less mean, but by that loftiness of thought and feeling which lifts
idea, in its nobler forms, has engendered in noble minds.

the derivation of animal and vegetable life from what we call
  The conclusion of pure intellect points this way
  But the purity is troubled by our interests in this
  Reason
height of suggesting that the suppression of the enquirer by the arm

wise; and in England at least, so long as the courtesy which befits an
man.
to say.
Jesuits, weaving their schemes of intellectual slavery, under the
  Our foes are to
the passionate, but a minority of minds of high calibre and culture,
by logic, still find the ethic life of their religion unimpaired.
while such considerations ought to influence the form of our argument,
that of scorn or abuse, its substance, I think, ought to be maintained

In the year 1855 the chair of philosophy in the University of Munich
penetration, great learning, and great courage, who had borne the
  His Jesuit colleagues, he
world from God by a separate and supernatural act of creation.
work entitled the 'Origin of the Human Soul,' Professor Frohschammer,
doctrine, and to affirm that man, body and soul, comes from his
only.
kind; and their organ, the 'Civilità Cattolica,' immediately pounced
  His book was branded as 'pestilent,' placed in the
 [Footnote:
 brought Liebig to Munich, he helped Helmholtz in
  But through
far more damage to the intellectual freedom of his country than his
  Priding himself on being a German
with the political affairs of Bavaria.
err on the score of indefiniteness.
Goethe does not dare to name, and whom Gassendi and Clerk Maxwell
annually, for England and Wales alone, a quarter of a million of new
  Taken in connection with the dictum of Mr.
annual increment to our population are 'mostly fools,' but little
the Divine operations.

Physiologists say that every human being comes from an egg not more
  Is this egg matter?  I hold
  Nine months
  Are the additions made during this
  If
subsequently slumbering in the womb, what is it?  The questions
repeated.
 Martineau will complain that I am disenchanting the
womb, woven by a something not itself, without conscious participation
living miracle, with all its organs and all their implications.
Consider the work accomplished during these nine months in forming the
behind.
organ--an instrument of three thousand strings, built adjacent to the
to all consciousness, the sonorous tremors of the external world.
this has been accomplished, not only without man's contrivance, but
withheld from him since his birth in the immeasurable past, until
  Matter I define as that mysterious thing by which
  How it came to have this power is a
  If, then, Matter
theology have deprived it of its birthright.
 Martineau need fear
  Theories of evolution go but a short way towards
give us a Poet competent to deal with it aright.

race of man, upon whose minds this mystery falls without producing
  The 'dry light' of the intellect suffices
give the mystery shape or expression.
men whose minds are warmed and coloured by its presence, and who,
overtopped.
healthy existence of these two classes of men; and different climates
  The history of humanity, however, proves the

for it to the intellectual whoredom of 'spiritualism.
wanted is the lifting power of an ideal element in human life.
the free play of this power must be preceded by its release from the
swaddling bands of the past.
the one, or strangled by the other.
time when the strength, insight, and elevation which now visit us in
shall be the stable and permanent possession of purer and mightier
knowledge of matter and their more faithful conformity to its laws.



********************
XII.

[Footnote: A Discourse delivered before the Glasgow Science Lectures
]
ONE of the most remarkable characteristics of the age in which we
preceding ages--to ascertain how the state of things that now is came
  And the more earnestly and profoundly this problem
which the world of to-day owes to that fore-world, in which man by
subdued the earth.
they were clever and observant ones.
discovery and development of seeds whose origin is now unknown.
tamed and harnessed their animal antagonists, and sent them down to us
  Later on, when
the same spirit of invention at work.
the first brewer, but we glean from history that his art was

described beer as the wine of barley.
preserve beer in a hot country, still, Egypt was the land in which it
exhilarating beverage overcoming all the obstacles which a hot climate

Our remote ancestors had also learned by experience that wine maketh
  Noah, we are informed, planted a vineyard,
  But, though wine
the secret of their formation.
the present year no thorough and scientific account was ever given of
conditions necessary to its health, and of the maladies and
  Hitherto the art and practice of
on empirical observation.
apart from the principles which explain them, and which give the mind
  The brewer learnt from long
  But he had to

fallen into acidity or rottenness, and disastrous losses have been
  It is the
hitherto contended, that recent researches are dragging into the light

*****
Let us glance for a moment at the outward and visible signs of
  A few weeks ago I paid a visit to a private still in a
  In the peasant's bedroom was a
  The cask contained
  It was not entirely
they were put in.
into this space.
  The oxygen of
acid gas.
oxygen of the air has done its duty in purifying the blood, the same
]  I tasted the
sweet.
placed in a copper boiler, to which a copper head was closely fitted.
From the head proceeded a copper tube which passed straight through a
  Under the open

time vapour rose into the head, passed through the tube, was condensed

known in commerce as Kirsch or Kirschwasser.

ferment of any kind being added to them.
been said of the cherry applies also to the grape.
fruit of the vine is placed in proper vessels, and abandoned to its
  It ferments, producing carbonic acid; its sweetness
grape-juice is converted into intoxicating wine.
of the cherries, the fermentation is spontaneous--in what sense

It is needless for me to tell a Glasgow audience that the beer-brewer
  In the first place the brewer deals
  The
drained and subjected to a temperature sufficient to cause the moist

  The malt is crisp to the teeth,
  It is
soluble portions have been extracted; the infusion thus produced being
  This is drawn off, and cooled as rapidly as
does, to its own action, the brewer mixes yeast with his wort, and
 Soon
yeast, issues from the aperture, and falls like a cataract into
  This frothing and foaming of the wort

Whence comes the yeast which issues so copiously from the fermenting
it?  Examine its quantity before and after fermentation.
introduces, say 10 cwts.
cwts.
during the fermentation.
has been spontaneously generated by the wort?  Are we not rather
fruit, some thirty fold, some sixty fold, some an hundred fold?  On
mere surmise.
infancy, Leeuwenhoek turned the instrument upon this substance, and
  Thus
Schwann in Germany, independently, but animated by it common thought,
yeast, and found it budding and sprouting before their eyes.
augmentation of the yeast alluded to above was thus proved to arise
Cerevisiae.

multiplies in the wort as its proper soil.
epoch in the history of fermentation.

is similar to that which must be given if it were asked where the
  He has received the seeds of both of them
  Could we connect without solution of
trace back the yeast employed by my friend Sir Fowell Buxton to-day to
  But you
was generated.
barley-corn was generated.
a living thing is easily generated because it is small.
yeast-plant and the barley-plant lose themselves in the dim twilight
spontaneous generation of the one, than there is of the spontaneous

I stated a moment ago that the fermentation of grape-juice was
appear more clearly by-and-by.
  The
introduce either yeast; or any equivalent of yeast, into his vats; he
indeed, he has been hitherto in ignorance whether plants or germs of
  Still, when the
alcoholic fermentation never fails to make its appearance.
this?  If no living germ has been introduced into the wine-vat, whence

of its own inherent powers, the grape-juice when brought into contact
own accord into these low forms of life.
objection to this explanation, provided proper evidence can be adduced
  But the evidence adduced in its favour, as far as I
criticism.
however keen and clever as observers, are not rigidly trained
  These alone are aware of the precautions necessary in
  In reference, then, to the life
by competent men?  Let a quantity of the clear, filtered 'must' of the
from the air or otherwise.
uncontaminated must never ferments.
generation are there, but so long as there is no seed sown, there is
concomitant of life.
  The
 By
grape its pure juice, and proved that in contact with pure air it
fermentation in other liquids.
animal body are also sealed from external contamination.
for example, drawn with due precautions from the veins, will never
]  It is not, therefore,
the vat is to be sought.

well-proved accuracy renders worthy of all confidence.
the vintage microscopic particles are observed adherent, both to the

  It is rendered
 Examined by a microscope, some of these minute

inert juice of the grape.
familiar Torula is observed budding and sprouting, the growth of the

that the particles adherent to the external surface of the grape
juice, appears in such profusion.
the ground that fermentation is 'artificial;' but we notice here the
  The ferment of the grape clings like a
from time immemorial has consisted in bringing--and it may be added,
actual contact with each other.
done consciously by the brewer, has been done unconsciously by the
  The one has sown his leaven just as much as the other.

fermentation.
or later ferments; but the chances are that the produce of that
taste.
fermentation, but the odds against obtaining it would be enormous.
Pure air acting upon a lifeless liquid will never provoke
which act as ferments when they fall into appropriate infusions.
of them produce acidity, some putrefaction.
yeast-plant are also in the air; but so sparingly distributed that an
taken possession of by foreign organisms.
beer are wholly due to the admixture of these objectionable ferments,
true leaven.

you can understand how easy it is to fall into error in studying the
  Indeed it is only the most accomplished
checking his conclusions, that can walk without tripping through this
  Such a man the French chemist Pasteur has hitherto
  He has taught us how to separate the commingled
 Guided
action of the true yeast-plant under different conditions.
sown in a fermentable liquid, which is supplied with plenty of pure
  The plant will flourish in the aerated infusion, and produce
carbon and oxygen.
oxygen of the air, which we suppose to be abundantly supplied to the
  The action is so far similar to the respiration of animals,
  If we examine the
hardly find in it a trace of alcohol.
flourished, but it has almost ceased to act as a ferment.
every individual yeast-cell seize, without any impediment, free oxygen
as a ferment altogether.

placed so that it may display its characteristic quality?  Reflection
experiment confirms the suggestion.
their closed vessel.
small aperture open to the air, through which it is observed not to
  Whence come the
small quantity of atmospheric air dissolved in the wort and overlying
  In no
respiration than by wrenching it from surrounding substances in which
  It
breathes forth carbonic acid gas, and one of the liquid products of
  The act of fermentation,
respiration by means of combined oxygen, when its supply of free
  As defined by Pasteur, fermentation is life

But here the knowledge of that thorough investigator comes to our aid
again.
provoke fermentation.
their vegetative vigour from contact with free oxygen.
possessed of this vigour the yeast may be transplanted into a
to live at the expense of the oxygen, carbon, and other constituents
  Under these new conditions its life, as a plant,
oxygen, but its action as a ferment will be indefinitely greater.

fermentation?  It would be singular if amid the multitude of low
way.
observation among the ancients to which we owe so vast a debt.
only did they discover the alcoholic ferment of yeast, but they had to
special prominence.
common paste or a pot of jam to the air; it soon becomes coated with a
little plant called Penicillium glaucum.
mould has sprung spontaneously from boot, or paste, or jam; its germs,
as legal and legitimate a way as thistle-seeds wafted by the wind to a
  Let the minute spores of Penicillium be sown in a
other spores or seeds which it may contain; let pure air have free
long filaments into the liquid, and fructifying at its surface.
the infusion at various stages of the plant's growth, you will never
  But forcibly submerge the little
oxygen that can reach it is insufficient for its needs, it immediately
decomposition of the sugar, and producing alcohol as one of the
  Many other low microscopic plants act
  In aerated liquids they flourish without any
ferments, producing alcohol exactly as the real alcoholic leaven
  For the right apprehension of all

In the cases hitherto considered, the fermentation is proved to be the
the fermentable substance.
within it, to some extent, the motive power of fermentation.
yeast-plant, as we have learned, is an assemblage of living cells; but
organisms.
example, are composed of cells, each of which is a living unit.
here I have to direct your attention to a point of extreme interest.
In 1821, the celebrated French chemist, Bérard, established the
atmosphere, absorbed the oxygen of the atmosphere and liberated an
  He also found that when
atmosphere was first absorbed, and an equal volume of carbonic acid
  But the process did not end here.
vanished, carbonic acid, in considerable quantities, continued to be
sugar, becoming more acid to the taste, though the absolute quantity
  This was an observation of capital
might be regarded as a kind of fermentation.

carbonic acid, exactly like the living cells of the leaven of beer.
Supposing the access of oxygen suddenly cut off, will the living
lives, by extracting oxygen from the saccharine juices round them?
  It was first
Lechartier and Bellamy, and the answer was subsequently confirmed and
  Bérard
acid; Lechartier and Bellamy proved the production of alcohol, thus
though the common alcoholic ferment was absent.


continue to live at the expense of the sugar of the fruit, that once
 Dumas,
atmosphere of carbonic acid, it will produce alcohol and carbonic acid
like the cells of the true alcoholic leaven.
and found the result to be what he had foreseen.
'enquiry.
jar with carbonic acid gas; beside it he placed twenty-four similar
  At the end of eight days, he removed the plums from
  The difference was
  The uncovered fruits had become soft, watery, and very
at all watery.
their sugar.
distilled.
cent.
  Neither in these plums, nor
ordinary alcoholic leaven be found.
Lechartier and Bellamy, the fermentation was the work of the living
  When,
ensued.
ceased when life was extinguished.

not, as Liebig had assumed, in virtue of its organic, but in virtue of
  He destroyed the cells of yeast by rubbing
the organism, though its chemical constituents remained, the power to

One word more in reference to Liebig may find a place here.
philosophic chemist thoughtfully pondering these phenomena, familiar
the interactions of purely chemical forces, nothing could be more
illustration of molecular instability, the ferment propagating to
combinations.
of truth in this theory; but Liebig, who propounded it, missed the
played in fermentation by microscopic life.
too little with the eye of the body, and too much with the spiritual
  He practically neglected the microscope, and was unmoved by the

illustration of Liebig's power to penetrate and unveil molecular
instead of a pharos to some of his followers.


from the alcoholic leaven, and sometimes seriously interfering with
  They are the weeds of this microscopic garden which often
  Let us take an illustrative case.
Expose milk to the air.
like blood into clot and serum.
a powerful microscope and watch it closely.
butter-globules animated by that curious quivering motion called the
  But let not this attract your attention too much,
  Here and there you
your eye upon the place of tumult, and you will probably see emerging
wriggling more or less rapidly across the field of the microscope.
Familiar with one sample of this organism, which from its motions
  It is
ones, which by decomposing the milk render it sour and putrid.
are the lactic and putrid ferments, as the yeast-plant is the
  Keep them and their germs out of your
  But milk may become putrid without
  Examine such putrid milk microscopically, and you find
vibrios, sometimes alone, and often manifesting a wonderful alacrity
  Keep these organisms and their germs out of your milk and
  Expose a mutton-chop to the air and keep it
  Place a drop of the juice of
organisms resembling those in the putrid milk.
receive the common name of bacteria, [Footnote: Doubtless organisms
common name.
  Keep them and their
  Thus we begin
there is another living world requiring the microscope for its
on the welfare of the higher life-world.

bacteria.
asked to state what it is.
reason to suspect that seeds of some kind are mixed up in it.
determine this point you prepare a bed in your garden, sow in it the
sprouting from your bed.
thistles ever made their appearance in your garden.
experiment once, twice, ten times, fifty times.
beds after the sowing of the powder, you obtain the same crop.
will be your response to the question proposed to you?  'I am not in a
is a dock-seed, or a thistle-seed; but I am in a condition to affirm
powder.
hands with grains becoming gradually smaller, until they dwindle to
all in the same way, and that from every one of them in a few days you
mignonette, it may be a plant more minute than any of these, smallness
affect the validity of the conclusion.
you would conclude that the powder must have contained the seeds or
  There is not in the range of physical
this one.

you are enabled to see it there just as plainly as you saw the heavier
  If the dust sown by the air instead of by
you would conclude that the germs of this crop must be mixed with the
 To take an illustration: the spores of the little plant
enough to float in the air.
vegetable marrow, or, as already mentioned, an old moist boot, a dish
Penicillium.
sown in this soil produces this plant, while, wanting the dust,
would be obviously just as certain in this case that the floating dust
garden contained the germs of the plants which sprung from them.


window-shutters.
through which a sunbeam can pass.
no light shall enter save through the hole in the shutter.
of the sunbeam is at first perfectly plain and vivid in the air of the
  If all disturbance of the air of the chamber be avoided, the
disappears absolutely, and no trace of the beam is to be seen.
rendered the beam visible at first?  The floating dust of the air,
or powder placed on the palm of the hand.
gradually sinks to the floor or sticks to the walls and ceiling, until
from mechanically suspended matter.

  Let us proceed.
Chop up a beefsteak and allow it to remain for two or three hours just
concentrated form.
you can obtain from it a perfectly transparent beef-tea.
number of vessels containing this tea to the moteless air of your
liquid to the dust-laden air.
stinks, and examined with the microscope every one of them is found
  After three months, or
sweet and clear, and as free from bacteria, as it was at the moment
  There is absolutely no difference between
other dust-laden.

the dust to enter it.
within the chamber swarming with bacteria, and in a state of active
  Here, also, the inference is quite as certain as in the
  Multiply your proofs by
imaginable infusion of wild animals and tame; of flesh, fish, fowl,
  If in all these
while neither the dustless air nor the nutritive infusion, nor both
simply irresistible that the dust of the air contains the germs of the
  I repeat there is no
  In the
in the 'Philosophical Transactions,' it would be simply monstrous to
generated.

answer without hesitation, none!  But to doubt the experimental proof
though some writers confuse matters by making them synonymous.
fact, this doctrine of spontaneous generation, in one form or another,
this age; but it is exactly these men who have the penetration to see,
support.


of life.
  When my
but which threaten to give way, she partially cooks the birds, kills
  By boiling her
  Some weeks ago in the

on the mountain slopes.
the warm rocks adjacent.
their paralysis was surprising.
a few languid struggles, would wholly lose its power of locomotion and
  Transferred to the warm rock, it
retransferred to the snow.
of our bacteria.
their power of producing or continuing putrefaction.
whole philosophy of the preservation of meat by cold.
for example, when he surrounds his very assailable wares by lumps of
inaction the organisms which produce it, and in the absence of which
  It is the astonishing activity
summer's day sometimes so disastrous to the great butchers of London
  The bodies of guides lost in the crevasses of Alpine
without the flesh showing any sign of putrefaction.
astonishing case of this kind is that of the hairy elephant of Siberia
  It had been buried for ages, but when
nutriment to the wild beasts which fed upon it.

which produce acetic, some lactic, and some butyric acid, while yeast
  In relation to
ferments have been properly called ferments of disease.
the true leaven are globules, usually somewhat elongated.
organisms are more or less rod-like or eel-like in shape, some of them
  Each of these organisms
  Keep them
  Never without
  But their germs are in the air,
impregnate the wort.
brewer is directed against them.
annihilate them.

importance; indeed, the recognised influence of temperature is causing
beer.
places specially devoted to the sale of Bavarian beer, which was then
  This beer is prepared by what is
because the yeast of the beer, instead of rising to the top and
partly, also, because it is produced at a low temperature.
and older process, called high fermentation, is far more handy,
  In high fermentation eight days suffice for
twenty days are found necessary.
are consumed in the process of low fermentation.
brewery of Dreher, of Vienna, a hundred million pounds of ice are
  Notwithstanding these
displacing the high upon the Continent.
which show the number of breweries of both kinds existing in Bohemia

    1865.

High Fermentation    281      81       18
Low Fermentation     135     459      831
Thus in ten years the number of high-fermentation breweries fell from
135 to 831.
involves a great expenditure of time, labour, and money--is the
ferments of disease.
are living organisms, have their activity suspended by temperatures
untainted either by acidity or putrefaction.
fermentation is brewed in winter, and kept in cool cellars; the brewer
its consumption to avoid the loss involved in its alteration if kept
  Hops, it may be remarked, act to some extent as an
  The essential oil of the hop is bactericidal:
exportation.

beginnings of life, were we not warned that the microscope, precious
life, are by no means purely useless or purely mischievous in the
  They are only noxious when out of their proper
  They exercise a useful and valuable function as the burners
matter, with a rapidity otherwise unattainable, to innocent carbonic
  Furthermore, they are not all alike, and it is only
  One
  Air,
support of the bacteria of putrefaction, is, according to Pasteur,
fermentation.
observation.

glass, and on the drop is placed a circle of exceedingly thin glass;
object-glass of the microscope should come very close to the
  Round the edge of the circular plate of glass the liquid
oxygen.
very lively ones.
appropriating it, the vivifying gas cannot penetrate to the centre of
  In the middle, therefore, the bacteria die, while their
  If a bubble of air chance to
wabble until its oxygen has been absorbed, after which all their
  Precisely the reverse of all this occurs with the
  In their case it is the peripheral organisms
ringed by a zone of dead.
a liquid containing these vibrios; through one vessel be led air, and
acid, and after three hours found the vibrios fully active.
while observing these differences of deportment fifteen years ago that
fermentation, flashed upon the mind of this admirable investigator.


more closely, and will be best illustrated by an actual fact.
years ago I was bathing in an Alpine stream, and returning to my
a block of granite, the sharp crystals of which stamped themselves
  The wound was an awkward one, but being in
  Dipping a
wound, limped home, and remained for four or five days quietly in bed.
There was no pain, and at the end of this time I thought myself quite
  The wound, when uncovered, was found perfectly
  Placing over it a
  Towards evening
and I was forced to go to bed again.
but it was powerless to check the action now set up; arnica was
  The inflammation increased
the mountain and transported to Geneva, where, thanks to the kindness
  On
 Gautier discovered an
 The
called, through which he was able to empty the abscess, without the

By what agency was that channel formed--what was it that thus tore
prisoner in bed?  In the very room where the water dressing had been
opened this year a number of tubes, containing perfectly clear and
  These hermetically
Alps and to the warmth of a kitchen, without showing the slightest
  But two days after they were opened the
germs of which had been contracted from the dust-laden air of the
  And had the matter from my abscess been examined, my memory of
swarming with these bacteria--that it was their germs which got into
that burrowed down my shin, dug the abscess in my instep, and produced

This apparent digression brings us face to face with the labours of a
and conscientiousness of the true experimenter, and whose practice is
wounds is to be averted by the destruction of the germs of bacteria.
Not only from his own reports of his cases, but from the reports of
expressed to me by continental surgeons, do I gather that one of the
the antiseptic system of treatment, introduced by Professor Lister.

  We began
  There
there are others smitten with everlasting incompetence in regard to
  To the former class in an eminent degree
relation to this subject have in them the forecast of prophecy.
let me add,' writes Boyle in his 'Essay on the Pathological Part of
and fermentations shall probably be much better able than he that
diseases (as well fevers as others), which will perhaps be never
fermentations.

and it is only in this our day that men are beginning to fully realise
  In the domain of surgery the justice of Boyle's surmise
  But we now pass the bounds of
those fevers so sagaciously referred to by Boyle.
analogy between a _contagium_ and a ferment is to be found in the power
 You
New Testament.
all.
  In a similar manner,
multiplied as to strike down whole populations.
produced upon the system by a microscopic quantity of the virus of
  That virus is, to all intents and purposes, a seed.
sown as yeast is sown, it grows and multiplies as yeast grows and
  To Pasteur we are
looseness and general baselessness of prevalent notions regarding the
  He guards himself against
  The true investigator is sparing in the use
but, as a matter of fact, Pasteur has never, been able to effect the
open doorways through which the affirmers of such transmutations had
 [Footnote: 'Those who wish for an
carelessness with which they have in some cases been conducted, will
 W.
 Dallinger's excellent 'Notes on
]
The great source of error here has been already alluded to in this
  The observers worked in an atmosphere charged with the
rendering now one organism, now another, triumphant.
stages, moreover, of its fermentative or putrefactive changes, the
by different organisms.
earlier organisms must have been transformed into the later ones,
changes in the infusion, render themselves valid at different times.

words, by teaching us how to rear the individual organism apart from
  And
it grows and multiplies indefinitely, but no change of it into another
  In Pasteur's researches the Bacterium
Penicillium, and the Torula a Torula.
purity in an appropriate liquid; you get it, and it alone, in the
  In like manner, sow small-pox in the human body,
  Sow there scarlatina, and your crop is
  Sow typhoid virus, your crop is typhoid--cholera, your
  The disease bears as constant a relation to its
germs, or indeed as a thistle does to its seed.
analogies so obvious and so striking, that the conviction is spreading
the root of epidemic disease--that living ferments finding lodgment in
which they subsist, or destroying life indirectly by the generation of
  This conclusion, which comes to
by the fact that virulently infective diseases have been discovered
associated as the growth of Torula is with the fermentation of beer.

well-meaning people.
when it is of the very last importance that light should once for all
take root and spread.
the organs and tissues of the living body must be studied; the habitat
disease must be determined, and the mode by which its germs are spread
  It is only by such rigidly
these destroyers.
shrinking sympathetically from all animal suffering--suffering which
the field of research now opening out before the physiologist causes
than the stoppage of experimental enquiry in this direction.
whose philanthropy has rendered her illustrious said to me some time
past, unlike those of the present, were carried on without cruelty.
replied to her that the science of Kepler and Newton, to which she
that one great advance made by modern science was in the direction of
scientific enquiry, though at the outset pursued at the cost of some
beneficent than it had ever hitherto been.
that the very researches which the lady deprecated were leading us to
sweep these scourges of the human race from the face of the earth.

it home to your intelligence by a single trustworthy illustration.
1850, two distinguished French observers, MM.
noticed in the blood, of animals which had died of the virulent
transparent rods, but neither of them at that time attached any
  In 1861, Pasteur published a memoir
which provoked it; and after reading this memoir it occurred to
within the animal body, by the organisms which had been observed by
  This idea has been placed beyond all doubt by

Observations of the highest importance have also been made on splenic
  Two years ago, Dr.
gave us a very clear account of what was known up to that time of this
  With regard to the permanence of the _contagium_, it had been
and this seemed to show that the rod-like organisms could not
vanish in a few weeks.
connection between the organisms and the disease, so that a review of
 Sanderson to conclude that the _contagium_
transparent rods; the other permanent but 'latent,' and not yet

At the time that Dr.
physician, named Koch, [Footnote: This, I believe, was the first
  1879.
occupied with the duties of his profession in an obscure country
various original and ingenious devices to the investigation of splenic
  He studied the habits of the rod-like organisms, and found the
nutria.
liquid containing the rods, placed the drop under his microscope,
  During the
this time the rods began to lengthen, and the action was so rapid that
times their original length.
they had formed filaments in many cases a hundred times the length of
  The same filament, in fact, was frequently

cases they were bent, twisted, and coiled into the most graceful
complexity that it was impossible for the eye to trace the individual

Had the observation ended here an interesting scientific fact would
been of little practical value.
filaments, and after a time noticed little dots appearing within them.
These dots became more and more distinct, until finally the whole
within the outer integument like peas within their shell.
the integument fell to pieces, the place of the organisms being taken
  These observations, which were
Breslau, are of the highest importance.
perplexity regarding the latent and visible _contagia_ of splenic fever;
distinguished from the rods, to constitute the _contagium_ of the fever

How did he reach this important result?  Mark the answer.
but one way open to him to test the activity of the _contagium_, and
  He operated upon
made upon mice.
suffering from splenic fever, they invariably died of the same disease
  He then sought to
  Drying the
the spores were not developed, he found the _contagium_ to be that which
 Sanderson calls 'fugitive.
for five weeks at the furthest.
fully-developed spores, and posed the substance to a variety of
  He permitted the dried blood to assume the form of dust;
an indefinite time in the midst of putrefying matter, and subjected it
  After keeping the spore-charged blood which
number of mice with it, and found its action as fatal as that of blood
  There
_contagium_.
body of every animal which has died of splenic fever, and every spore
  The name of
 [Footnote: Koch found
fever must enter the blood; the virulently festive spleen of a
  On the other
partridges, or sparrows.
act as a ferment.
propagation of the vibrios of the silkworm disease called _flacherie_,
  He also made some remarkable

 168 and 256.

the knowledge of their nature; and the knowledge brought to us by Dr.
Koch will render as certain the stamping out of splenic fever as the

from the heat of their blood, which destroyed the bacillus, Pasteur
them.
inoculation, and saved them.
the importance of this experiment.
will show what this implies.
Russia, between the years 1867 and 1870, over fifty-six thousand cases
recorded.
for during the time and in the district referred to, five hundred and

A description of the fever will help you to come to a right decision
  'An
 Burdon Sanderson, 'which perhaps for the previous
to shudder and to have twitches of the muscles of the back, and soon
  In the meantime the respiration
or four degrees above the normal; but soon convulsions, affecting
of which the progress is marked by the loss of all power of moving the
sanguinolent alvine evacuations, and similar discharges from the mouth
' In a single district of Russia, as above remarked,
twenty-eight men and women, perished in this way during a period of
  What the annual fatality is throughout Europe I
  Doubtless it must be very great.
question, then, which I wish to submit to your judgment is this: Is
extirpation, of a disorder so virulent and so vile, worth the price
present should see clearly the issues at stake in such questions as
temper, if not restrain, the rashness of those who, meaning to be
restrictions upon physiological investigations.
instance of zeal for God, but not according to knowledge, the excesses

*****
And now let us cast a backward glance on the field we have traversed,
yield.
bodies by amber was the sum of human knowledge regarding electricity,
any knowledge of its cause.
another, and cannot appear without its proper antecedent.
before fermentation could be understood, the microscope had to be
  Note
  Leeuwenhoek, in 1680, found yeast to be a
alive.

and in this connection '`the memoir of Pasteur, published in the

On that investigation all Pasteur's subsequent labours were based.
Ravages had over and over again occurred among French wines.
was no guarantee that they ould not become acid or bitter, particularly
  The commerce in wines was thus restricted, and disastrous
  Every one of these
  Pasteur ascertained the
so low as to be perfectly harmless to the wine.
expedient of heating the wine to a temperature of fifty degrees
loss of millions.
wine--which he proved to be produced by a fermentation set up by a
 Torula, in fact, converts the
into vinegar.
were sustained.
often became unfit for use, sometimes indeed falling into utter
  It had been long known that mere exposure to the air was
  Pasteur studied all these changes, traced
the vinegar was ensured by the destruction of this life.
from the diseases of vinegar to the study of a malady which a dozen
  This
parasite which first took possession of the intestinal canal of the
to contain the viscid matter of the silk.
would go automatically through the process of spinning when it had

Pasteur followed this parasitic destroyer from year to year, and led
discovered eventually the precise phase in the development of the
stamped out.
  He
population from ruin, set the looms of Italy also to work, but emerged
  His
in which he describes a method of rendering beer permanently
  That method is not so simple as those found effectual
to receive extensive application at some future day.

were they now passed over without remark, would sooner or later occur
  I have spoken of the
the perfect immunity from putrefaction which accompanies the contact
  Consider the woes which these
inflicted on mankind; consider the loss of life in hospitals from
of wounds, but no hospitals, and in the ages before hospitals were
that of the battlefield, when those bacterial destroyers are let
itself; add to this the other conception that in times of epidemic
mingled with it the special germs which produce the epidemic, being
continents--consider all this, and you will come with me to the
evanescent if compared with the ravages due to atmospheric dust.

permitted to go on for ages, without a whisper of information

ambuscades, and it is only to-day that the light of science is being
  Facts like these
are different from what we in our youth supposed them to be--that the
and move and have our being and our end, is to be propitiated by means
  The first requisite towards
illuminated by that knowledge.
which will open out by-and-by to perfect day; while the action which
emotional nature of man--in his desire for personal well-being, in his
his fellow-men.
 William Budd in his celebrated
single narrow chamber of the day-labourer's cottage the father in the
to relieve the desolation of the children but the devotion of some
becoming herself the victim of the same disorder!' From the vantage
of medical art over scenes of misery like that here described.
cause of the calamity being once clearly revealed, not only to the
absolutely essential to success, the final victory of humanity is only
  We have already a foretaste of that victory in





  SPONTANEOUS GENERATION.

]
WITHIN ten minutes' walk of a little cottage which I have recently
the upper mountains.
life is to be discerned in this water; but invariably towards the end
seen enjoying the sun's warmth along the shallow margins of the lake,
danger.
means obvious.
adult frog, or the smallest fragment of frog spawn; so that were I not
natural one, namely, that tadpoles are generated in lake mud by the

The checks which experience alone can furnish being absent, the
scale of being was assumed for ages to be a fact.
the dominant mind of Aristotle stamped its notions on the world at
  For nearly twenty centuries after him men found no difficulty
rejected as monstrous by the most fanatical supporter of the doctrine.
Shell-fish of all kinds were considered to be without parental origin.
Eels were supposed to spring spontaneously from the fat ooze of the
  Caterpillars were the spontaneous products of the leaves on
all thought capable of being generated without sexual intervention.

putrefying flesh; and, lacking the checks imposed by fuller
generative power is a natural one.
ten or twelve seeing a joint of imperfectly salted beef cut into, and
  Without a moment's
spontaneously generated in the meat.
qualify or oppose this conclusion, and for the time it was
  The childhood of the individual typifies that of the
two thousand years.

physician to the Grand Dukes Ferdinand II.
 of
1668.
their possible origin.
nor with the theoretic guesswork which his predecessors had founded
  Watching meat during its passage
invariably observed flies buzzing round the meat and frequently
  The maggots, he thought, might be the half-developed

The inductive guess precedes experiment, by which, however, it must be
  Redi knew this, and acted accordingly.
meat in a jar and covering the mouth with paper, he found that, though
the same meat placed in open jars soon swarmed with these organisms.
For the paper cover he then substituted fine gauze, through which the
  Over it the flies buzzed, and on it
eggs to fall through, no maggots were generated in the meat.
were, on the contrary, hatched upon the gauze.
experiments Redi destroyed the belief in the spontaneous generation of
  The
succeeded in banishing the notion of spontaneous generation from the
  Indeed, as regards such complex
notion was banished for ever.

death-blow to much that had been previously written and believed
life formed of individuals so minute--so close as it seemed to the
to organisms.
found clouded and crowded with creatures far beyond the reach of
microscope.
called 'Infusoria.
obvious difficulty of assigning a germinal origin to existences so
the notion of heterogenesis or spontaneous generation.

leaders of which only can here be briefly alluded to.
side, we have Buffon and Needham, the former postulating his 'organic
'vegetative force' which drew the molecules together so as to form
  On the other side, we have the celebrated Abbé Lazzaro
by Needham in 1748, and obtained by methods so precise as to
predecessor.
their necks with the blowpipe, subjected them in this condition to the
favourable to the development of life.
unchanged for months, and when the flasks were subsequently opened no

Here I may forestall matters so far as to say that the success of
worked.
infusorial germs, for otherwise the process he followed would, as was
  But
less valid on this account.
that others in repeating his experiments obtained life where he
  Rather is the refutation strengthened by such
  Given two experimenters equally skilful and equally
same way, and assuming the one to obtain life while the other fails to
that some ingredient foreign to the infusion must be its cause in the

Spallanzani's sealed flasks contained but small quantities of air, and
was thought that the absence of life observed by Spallanzani might
  To dissipate this
which animal and vegetable matters were added.
infusion to destroy whatever life it might contain, Schulze sucked
containing concentrated sulphuric acid, where all germs of life
  From May to
infusorial life.

comparatively pure air, but even in such air his experiment is a very
  Germs will pass unwetted and unscathed through sulphuric
  I have
results.
  The air passes in bubbles
air must be so slow as to cause the whole of its floating matter, even
  But
as sulphuric acid.
atmosphere I have thus drawn air for weeks without intermission, first
organic infusions, without any appearance of life.
killed by the water, but they were effectually intercepted, while the
with strongly corrosive substances was avoided.

1836, was followed in 1837 by another short and pregnant communication

Redi, as we have seen, traced the maggots of putrefying flesh to the
  But he did not and he could not know the meaning of
  He had not the instrumental means to inform him

  Schwann placed
sterilised the flask by boiling, and then supplied it for months with
  Throughout this time there appeared no mould, no
liquid continued as clear as it was immediately after boiling.
then varied his experimental argument, with no alteration in the
  His final conclusion was, that putrefaction is due to
therein of minute organisms.
the air, but from something contained in the air, which was destroyed
  There never was a more determined
though a strange attempt was made a year and a half ago to enlist him

The physical character of the agent which produces putrefaction was
  By means of a membrane, he
  The
  Hence it was not the
the membrane--but something contained in the liquid, and which was
  In 1854
subsequently followed up by Schroeder alone.
employed plugs of cotton-wool to filter the air supplied to their
  Fed with such air, in the great majority of cases the
  Milk
  It putrefied
  The

In that year a book was published which seemed to overturn some of the
  Its title was
  A.
Museum of Natural History at Rouen.
not only of scientific but of metaphysical fervour, he threw his whole
  Never did a subject require the exercise of
unravelling of complex phenomena, care in the preparation of
and incessant questioning of results until repetition had placed them
  To a man of Pouchet's temperament the
with which he approached it.
his preface: 'Lorsque, par la meditation, it fut evident pour moi que
nature pour la reproduction des êtres, je m'appliquai à découvrir par
evidence: It is needless to say that such a prepossession required a
  Pouchet repeated the experiments of Schulze and Schwann
  He heaped experiment
of the advocate the logic of the man of science.
multitudes required to produce the observed results, he ridiculed the
  This was one of his strongest
 'Si les Proto-organismes que nous voyons pulluler partout et
proportion mathématiquement indispensable a cet effet, l'air en serait
serrés que les globules d'eau qui forment, nos nuages épais.
pas là la moindre exagération.
exclaims: 'L'air dans lequel noun vivons aurait presque la densité du
'  There is often a virulent contagion in a confident tone, and
swayed not by knowledge, but by authority.
'the blue ethereal sky' is formed of suspended particles, through
line of argument.

which he began it, and landed him in downright credulity in the end.
do not question his ability as an observer, but the enquiry needed a
  This latter implies not mere ability to
her to show herself under conditions prescribed by the experimenter
  Here Pouchet lacked the necessary discipline.
vigour of his onset raised clouds of doubt, which for a time obscured
  So difficult indeed did the subject seem,
his intention to take it up, his friends Biot and Dumas expressed
limit to the time he purposed spending in this apparently unprofitable
 [Footnote: 'Je ne conseillerais à personne,' said Dumas to his
sujet.
 lxiv.
 22.
Since that time the illustrious Perpetual Secretary of the Academy of
']
Schooled by his education as a chemist, and by special researches on
subject under particularly favourable conditions.
culture had given strength and finish to his natural aptitudes.
1862, accordingly, he published a paper 'On the Organised Corpuscles
 By
air surrounding his laboratory in the Rue d'Ulm, and subjected them to
  Many of them he found to be organised
  Sowing them in sterilised infusions, he obtained abundant
  By more refined methods he repeated
Pouchet, Montegazza, Joly, and Musset.
experiments of Schroeder and von Dusch.
which communicated life to his infusions was not uniformly diffused
power to generate life.
Montanvert, he snipped off the ends of a number of hermetically sealed
  One out of twenty of the flasks
eight out of twenty of the same infusions, supplied with the air of
  He took his flasks into the
caves devoid of generative power.
carried out with a severity perfectly obvious to the instructed
the conviction that, even in these lower raches of the scale of being,

The main position of Pasteur has been strengthened by practical
  He has applied the knowledge
manufacture of vinegar, to the staying of the plague which threatened
examination of other formidable diseases which assail the higher
  His relation to the improvements which
quoted in his Etudes sur la Bière.
 43.
Lister there expressly thanks Pasteur for having given him the only
successful issue.
which we have been lately accustomed, throw abundant light upon their

Redi, as we have seen, proved the maggots of putrefying flesh to be
be the concomitant of far lower forms of life than those dealt with by
  Our knowledge here, as elsewhere in connection with this
  'No
bacteria be destroyed and new ones prevented from entering it.
Putrefaction begins as soon as bacteria, even in the smallest numbers,
  It progresses in
retarded when they exhibit low vitality, and is stopped by all
  All
'
'Wer noch heut die Faeulniss von einer spontanen Dissociation der
gar aus "Stickstoffsplittern" die Balken zur Stuetze seiner
Faeulniss ohne Bacterium Termo" zu widerlegen.

converted our hospitals into charnel-houses, and it is their
operations which no surgeon would have attempted a few years ago.
gain is immense--to the practising surgeon as well as to the patient
  Contrast the anxiety of never feeling sure whether
access of a few particles of unseen hospital dust, with the comfort
such dust has been surely and certainly annihilated.
of living _contagia_ extends beyond the domain of the surgeon.
of reproduction and indefinite self-multiplication which is
_contagia_ 'breeding true,' has given strength and consistency to a
generally are the concomitants of parasitic life.
faintly visible to us a vast and destructive laboratory of nature
changes to which dead organic matter passively liable, appear bound
causation.
Council, 1874, p.
]  According to this view, which, as I have said,
conflict between the person smitten by it and a specific organism
disintegrating his tissues, or poisoning him by the decompositions

*****
During the ten years extending from 1859 to 1869, researches on
my continual attention.
cleanse it effectually of floating matter, and while doing so I was
matter passed freely through alkalis, acids, alcohols, and ethers.
eye being kept sensitive by darkness, a concentrated beam of light was
and in air--a test indeed indefinitely more searching and severe than
  With the aid of such
agitation, so as to allow the floating matter to subside; calcined
  In all
Schroeder, Pasteur, and Lister in regard to spontaneous generation was
  The air which they found inoperative was proved by the
  Having
evening, January 21, 1870, I brought it before the members of the
  Two or three months subsequently, for sufficient
subject in a letter to the Times.
important question.

of Dr.
  He did me the honour to
to the biologist and physician: He expressed 'amazement' at my
'much irreparable mischief might be occasioned.
preliminary experience to guide and warn him, the English heterogenist
adventurous in his conclusions.
the results of his celebrated predecessor, but he did much more--the
manipulation into those more 'complex chemical compounds,' which we
' [Footnote: 'It is further
correlative products, coming into existence in the several
compounds.
 of Pathological Society, vol.

]
As regards the public who take an interest in such things, and
our clever countryman succeeded in restoring the subject to a state of
Pouchet's volume in 1859.

minds, and doubly desirable on practical grounds that it should be
  In the present article,
eminent and fair-minded member of the medical profession who, as
 Such
the impersonal.
my friend.
ability, so to conduct this discussion that he who runs may read and

Let us begin at the beginning.
laboratory of the Royal Institution, where I place before him a basin
temperature of 120° Fahr.
hours we pour off the liquid, boil it, filter it, and obtain an
  We cool the infusion,
being 1000.
on the margin, are before us.
spirit-lamp, and its open end is then dipped into the turnip infusion.
The warmed glass is afterwards chilled, the air within the flasks

  We now heat
  Steam is produced, which issues from the open
  After a few

place, and in this way we fill our little flask to about four-fifths
  This description is typical; we may thus fill a

I now ask my friend to notice a trough made of sheet copper, with two
  This trough, or
kind of lid for the oil-bath.
apertures wide enough to allow our small flask to pass through and

to its boiling point, which is not sensibly over 212° Fahr.
issues from the open neck of the flask, and the boiling is continued
  With a pair of small brass tongs, an assistant now
the latter out of the oil.
violence is abated.
neck of the flask is seized close to its open end, while with the
under the middle of the neck.
and as it is gently drawn out the neck diminishes in diameter, until
  The tongs with the fragment of
by evaporation, is lifted from the oil-bath perfectly sealed

Sixty such flasks filled, boiled, and sealed in the manner described,
are carefully packed in sawdust, and transported to the Alps.
to an elevation of about 7,000 feet above the sea, I invite my
  It is the month of July, and the weather
  We open our box at the Bel-Alp, and
drinking water.

its fragile end broken off in the transit from London.
the flasks, and the observed muddiness is the result.
knows as well as I do what this means.
or even with a microscope of insufficient power, nothing is seen in
diameters or so, what an astonishing appearance does it present!
water at 500,000,000: probably the population of a drop of our turbid
  The field of the
shooting rapidly across the microscopic field.
thither like a rain of minute projectiles; they pirouette and spin so
the little living rod into a twirling wheel.
celebrated naturalists tell us they are vegetables.
shape which they so frequently assume, these organisms are called
very diverse kinds.

flasks, or is it the progeny of living germinal matter carried into
self-generative power, how are the sterility and consequent clearness
may urge--and fairly urge--that the assumption of germinal matter is
to wake up the dormant infusions.
immediately.
the exact lines laid down by our most conspicuous heterogenist.
distinctly affirms that the withdrawal of the atmospheric pressure
accounts for their absence in tins of preserved meat, fruit, and
tins, that gases have been generated, the pressure of which has

 i.
theory of preserved meats.
meat, fruit, or vegetable under water with the view of testing its
  In well-preserved tins he
  I
sixty-three years in the Royal Institution.
the same test, yielded the same result.
during the last two years, I have placed glass tubes, containing clear
subjected them to air-pressures varying from ten to twenty-seven
sufficient to tear a preserved meat tin to shreds.
these infusions were taken from their bottles rotten with putrefaction
  Thus collapses an hypothesis which had no
slightest attempt been made to verify it.

heterogenist.
we suspend them in a warm kitchen.
accidentally broken; but at the end of a month we find the fifty
  There is no sign of
  We divide these flasks into
of counting rendered the division uneven).
whether the admission of air can liberate any generative energy in the
  Our next experiment will answer this question and
  We carry the flasks to a hayloft, and there, with a
three-and-twenty.
inrush of air.
a spirit-lamp, to a ledge overlooking the Aletsch glacier, about 200
precipitously to the north-east for about a thousand feet.
wind blows towards us from the north-east--that is, across the crests
  We are therefore bathed by
with either animal or vegetable life.
the flasks, for no dust or particle from my clothes or body must be
  An assistant ignites the spirit-lamp, into the
germs or organisms.

being opened without the previous cleansing of the pliers by the
  In this way we charge our seven-and-twenty flasks with clean

We place the fifty flasks, with their necks open, over a kitchen
days find twenty-one out of the twenty-three flasks opened on the
from them.
conditions, not one of the twenty-seven flasks opened in free air had
  No germ from the kitchen air had ascended the narrow
  They are still
when sent off from London.
Bel Alp is here described.

Twenty-seven putrescible infusions, first in vacuo, and afterwards
putrefaction or of life.
asking him whether the hayloft has rendered them spontaneously
  Is not the inference here imperative that it is not the
with the general atmosphere--but something contained in the air, that
entering through a chink in the roof or wall, and traversing the air

  Can
by all antecedent experience to regard these fruitful particles as the

discussions.
dead decaying matter can produce fermentation.
fermentation was by no means synonymous with life.
according to him, the shaking asunder by chemical disturbance of
  Does the life of our flasks, then, proceed from
ask him, 'What warrant does Nature offer for such an assumption?
have been clearly traced, is the slightest countenance given to the
With regard to Baron Liebig, had he studied the revelations of the
never have missed the significance of the facts revealed.
however, neglected the microscope, and fell into error--but not into
invoked.
often made of his name--Liebig's view of fermentation was at least a
instability.
planting of dead particles--'Stickstoffsplittern' as Cohn
life.


air.
to be completely closed, with the exception of an aperture in a
  The
  Let a lens be placed in
  Its parallel rays are now
unbroken whiteness by the intensity of its illumination.
from all glare, the eye is peculiarly sensitive to this, scattered
  The floating dust of London rooms is organic, and may be
  The action of a spirit-lamp


laboratory, I placed an ignited spirit-lamp.
and round its rim, were seen curious wreaths of darkness resembling an
  On placing the flame at some distance below
  They were blacker
steamer; and their resemblance to smoke was so perfect as to prompt
required but a beam of sufficient intensity to reveal its clouds of

But is the blackness smoke?  This question presented itself in a
the beam; from it the black wreaths also ascended.
flame, which emits no smoke, was next employed, and it also produced
  Smoke
of stellar space; that is to say, blackness resulting from the absence
light.
was destroyed in situ; and the heated air, freed from this matter,
substituted for their light the darkness due to its own perfect
  Nothing could more forcibly illustrate the invisibility
  The beam crossed,
sides of the gap, the thick-strewn particles shone out like a luminous
 [Footnote: See Fragment: 'On
 i.


putrefaction when exposed to common air, to be brought into contact
putrefy.
violent calcination.
may be thought, no longer the oxygen suitable for the development and
  We have an easy escape from this difficulty,
been affected by the flame.
large flask or bolthead containing common air.
is seen within the flask--the dust revealing the light, and the light
 Cork the flask, stuff its neck with cotton-wool,
or two.
visible; the light passes through the flask as through a vacuum.
floating matter has abolished itself, being now attached to the

Were it our object, as it will be subsequently, to effectually detain
 Here,
ridding it, or rather of enabling it to rid itself, of floating

We have now to devise a means of testing the action of such
  Wooden
side-windows, and back-doors.
test-tubes pass air-tight; their open ends, for about one-fifth of the
  Provision is made for
outer air.
chamber.
inches in diameter, closed air-tight by a sheet of India-rubber.
is pierced in the middle by a pin, and through the pin-hole is pushed
  The
glycerine; so that, tightly clasped by the rubber and wool, the
into the chamber.
test-tubes, its side-windows w w, its pipette p c, and its sinuous

The chamber is carefully closed and permitted to remain quiet for two
  Examined at the beginning by a beam sent through its
days has wholly disappeared.
internal surface of the chamber was at the outset coated with
  The fresh but putrescible liquid is introduced into the
  Permitted to remain
fill itself with life.
dust-laden air outside by which it has been infected, and the
  This is done by plunging the six tubes
  The time
 Two
hundred minutes' boiling fails to destroy others.
has been sterilised, the oil-bath is withdrawn, and the liquid, whose
abandoned to the air of the chamber.

infusions of the most various kinds, embracing natural animal liquids,

tested, many of them repeatedly.
any of the results.
perfect limpidity and sweetness, which in some cases lasted for more
and its characteristic smells.
countenance lent to the notion that an infusion deprived by heat of
visibly suspended matter, has any power to generate life anew.

the strictness of our adherence to the rules of preparation laid down
upon the very substances recommended by them as capable of furnishing,
generation, and that we have added to their substances many others of
must have manifested itself somewhere.
that in such closed chambers at least five hundred chances have been

The argument is now to be clenched by an experiment which will remove
employed to sustain life.
chambers, and permit the common air with its floating particles to
  For three months they have remained
ever cook manufactured.
suffices to render them muddy, fetid, and swarming with infusorial
  The liquids are thus proved, one and all, ready for
  I invite my
  How will he account for the
optically pure air, and its infallible putrefaction in a few days when
that the dust-particles are the cause of putrefactive life.
unless he accepts the hypothesis that these particles, being dead in
must conclude that the life we have observed springs from germs or

The experiments with hermetically sealed flasks have reached the
  A sample group of 130 of them were laid before the
  They were utterly free from life,
  Special
exposed should include those previously alleged to be efficient.
conditions laid down by the heterogenist were accurately copied, but
  Stress was then laid on
temperatures with which both of us had previously worked.
protest against the caprice thus manifested, I met this new
  The sealed tubes, which had proved barren in the
under the supervision of an intelligent assistant in the Turkish Bath
  From two to six days had been allowed for the
  Mine remained
  Thermometers placed in
temperature to vary from a minimum of 101° to a maximum of 112° Fahr.
At the end of nine days the infusions were as clear as at the
  They were then removed to a warmer position.
temperature of 115° had been mentioned as particularly favourable to
  For fourteen days the temperature of the
reaching 116° on three occasions, 118° on one, and 119° on two.
result was quite the same as that just recorded.
temperatures proved perfectly incompetent to develope life.

if our 940 flasks were opened on the hayloft of the Bel Alp, 858 of
  The escape of the remaining
the air, nor in the infusions, nor in anything continuous diffused
nourished by the infusions, we are to seek the cause of life.
experiment proves these particles to be in some cases so far apart on
without contracting contamination.
proved the cause of 'so-called spontaneous generation' to be
  I have already referred to his observation that 12 out
20 flasks opened on the Mer de Glace escaped.
the Bel Alp is a more emphatic instance of the same kind, 90 per cent
those opened on the free mountain ledge was attacked.

changing through natural causes, and we are able to alter it at will.
Of a number of flasks opened in 1876 in the laboratory of the Royal
  were smitten, while 58 per cent.


  The greater mortality, so to speak, of the
germinal dust in the laboratory air, causing it to approximate as
  I would
foregoing facts.
'impossible.
but to proofs, and the experiments just described do most 'distinctly
waste paper.

may be disposed to urge that other able and honourable men working at
 Most
speaking of the experiments of Spallanzani, to the effect that the
evidence.
the laboratory of the Royal Institution, repeats there my experiments,
or King's College where, operating with the same infusions, he obtains
  Will he be disposed to conclude that the
Street or the Strand?  His Alpine experience has already made known to
samples of air as regards their capacity for putrefactive infection.
And, possessing this knowledge, will he not substitute for the
and spontaneously generative at another, the more rational and obvious
to the infusion are infective in different degrees?
As regards workmanship, moreover, he will not fail to bear in mind,
barrenness involves the presumption of correct experiment.
the careful worker that can secure the latter, while it is open to
  Barrenness is the result at which
be, ought to aim, omitting no pains to secure it, and resorting only
observed comes from no source which correct experiment could

Let us again take a definite case.
with the same apparent care on 100 infusions--or rather on 100 samples
barren.
equally balanced? There are some who would not only say this, but who
lower the evidential value of the 50 barren flasks by labelling them
  This, as shown by Dr.
exact inversion of the true order of the terms positive and negative.
[Footnote: See his truly philosophical remarks on this head in the
 282.
be the course pursued by my friend.
he would, I doubt not, repeat the experiment with redoubled care and
that he had not fallen into error.
carried out would infallibly lead him to the conclusion that here, as
crumbles in the grasp of the competent enquirer.

resistance to heat.
 Thiselton Dyer for
  It is, however, surprising
more thoroughly explored.
seeds might be able to add to our knowledge.
momentary exposure to the boiling temperature, while others withstand
  Most of our ordinary seeds are rapidly killed,
that certain seeds, which had been transported in fleeces of wool from
  The germs of the air
 In some
minutes, or even less, would be sure to destroy them all; in other
boiling would be requisite to deprive them of their power of
  The absence or presence of a truss of desiccated hay
  The
greatest on record--was a case of survival after eight hours' boiling.

atmosphere might be classified under the following and intermediate
in fifteen; not killed in fifteen minutes but killed in thirty; not
but killed in two hours; not killed in two but killed in three hours;
  I have had several
after six, and one after eight hours' boiling.
experiment actually reached; but there is no valid warrant for fixing

extensive) would reveal germs more obstinate still.
certain that we might begin earlier, and find germs which are
  In the
their germs would be unmeaning--but of this more anon.

that a naked, or almost naked, speck of protoplasm can withstand four,
make no assertion.
of fancy.
'assumption,' nor a 'probable guess,' nor as 'a wild hypothesis,' but
bacillus, when thoroughly desiccated by age, have withstood the ordeal
  And I further affirm that these obdurate germs, under the
five minutes' boiling, or even less.
  The
water, and it is fair to assume that the nearer the germ is to its

  This premised, the simple
understood.

otherwise protected against the floating matters of the air, is
  Such germs as have reached the
bacteria are thus destroyed.
room for ten or twelve hours.
liquid charged with well-developed bacteria.
the end of ten or twelve hours we raise the infusion a second time to
approaching their point of final development.
put aside for ten or twelve hours, and the process of heating is
  We thus kill the germs in order of their resistance, and
  No infusion can withstand this process
  Artichoke, cucumber,
infected with the germs of desiccated hay, were completely broken down
sufficient to accomplish what three hundred minutes' continuous
  I applied the method, moreover, to
life.
  These results were clearly
the test of every true theory, that test being the power of prevision.

imagination is drawn upon, not the objective truth of Nature.
words sound like the words of knowledge where knowledge is really nil.
The possibility of a 'thin covering' is conceded by those who speak in
  Such a covering may, however, exercise a powerful
  A thin pellicle of India-rubber, for example,
to reduce an uncovered pea to a pulp.
imbibition, diffusion, and the consequent disintegration.
oily surface, or even the layer of air which clings to certain bodies,
  'The singular resistance
 William Roberts,
smooth glistening epidermis which prevented complete wetting of their
' I pointed out in 1876 that the process by which an
investigation.
on water for a year.
though its specific gravity is nearly eight times that of water.

and that of the liquid into which it falls, wetting would be simply
  Antecedent, to all development there must be an
interchange must obviously depend upon the relation of the germ to its
  Anything that hinders this interchange retards
  In my paper published
remark:
It is not difficult to see that the surface of a seed or germ may be
contact between it and the surrounding liquid.
moreover, may be so indurated by time and dryness as to resist

necessary to produce the swelling and softening which precede its

*****
However this may be--whatever be the state of the surface, or of the
certainty resist, under some circumstances, exposure for hours to the
  No theoretic scepticism can successfully stand
not thousands, of rigidly conducted experiments.


of spontaneous generation as formulated in this country.
view, I place before my friend and co-enquirer two liquids which have
optically pure air.
proportions all the substances which enter into the composition of
hundred other infusions, animal or vegetable.
clear as distilled water, and there is no trace of life in either of
 They are, in fact, completely sterilised.
which a little water has been poured to keep its juices from drying
 It smells
 Placing a drop of the fetid mutton-juice under a

solution and the clear turnip infusion, as a surgeon might inoculate
 In four-and-twenty hours the transparent
at first they are teeming with life.
thousand times with the same invariable result.
liquids at the beginning were alike, being both equally transparent-to

any one of a hundred other putrid liquids, animal or vegetable.
long as the liquid contains living bacteria a speck of it communicated
produces in twenty-four hours the effect here described.

closed chamber which has contained for months the pure mineral
of them a small pinch of laboratory dust.
than when the speck of putrid liquid was employed.
however, after its infection with the dust, the turnip infusion is
 But what about the
undistinguishable from the turnip-juice? At the end of three days
 At the end of three weeks
 We may repeat the experiment
invariable result.
atmospheric dust yields a crop of bacteria-never in the former does
 [Footnote: This is
 My own
bacteria, though exceedingly slow and difficult, is not impossible.
What is the inference which the reflecting mind must draw from this
able to feed the bacteria and to enable them to increase and multiply,
able to develope into active bacteria the germinal dust of the air?
I invite my friend to reflect upon this conclusion he will, I think,
 He may, if he prefers, hold the
not as germs but as desiccated organisms.
while the one liquid is able to force the passage from the inactive to

But this is not at all the inference which has been drawn from

Seeing its ability to nourish bacteria when once inoculated with the
solution after long exposure to the air, the inference was drawn that
 Throughout
heterogeny, is infected with this error; while heterogenists at home
doctrine.
solution that neither bacteria nor their germs exist in the air;
air, bacteria appear, they must of necessity have been spontaneously
 In the words of Dr.
the boiled saline solution is quite incapable of engendering bacteria,
infusion.
 xxi.

]
I would ask my eminent colleague what he thinks of this reasoning now?
develope bacteria;' the inference is--'Therefore if a turnip infusion
generated.

is chimerical.
bacteria as London chimneys are with smoke.
referred to is completely disposed of by the simple question: 'Why,
air, should this generation of life _de novo_ utterly cease? Why should
solution for the three hundred and sixty-five days of the year, in
that the portion of that atmosphere in contact with the juice shall be
dust fills it with bacteria?' Am I over sanguine in hoping that as
reads may understand?
We now proceed to the calm and thorough consideration of another
it somewhat difficult to seize by reason of the very opulence of the

death-point of bacteria.
modern English literature of the question will remember how challenge
one or two home workers in particular, to come to close quarters on
 It is obviously the stronghold of the English
 'Water,' he says, `is boiling merrily over a fire when
exercises its scathing influence upon an uncovered portion of the
 Here, at all events, there is no room for
 Boiling water unquestionably exercises a most pernicious and
composed.
 133.
should be supposed that it is the high organisation which, in this
boiling water on the hen's egg to dissipate the notion.
conclusion,' he says, 'would seem to force itself upon us that there
upon living matter-whether this matter be of high or of low
' [Footnote: Bastian, 'Evolution,' p.
]  Again, at
influence of boiling water is destructive of all living matter.
[Footnote: Ibid.
 46]
The experiments already recorded plainly show that there is a marked
soft, and active bacteria of putrefying organic liquids.
be luxuriantly bred in the saline solution, the others refuse to be
turnip infusion.
deportment of the one liquid cannot with the warrant of scientific
 But this is exactly what the
bacteria the error into which he fell concerning the germs of the air.
Let us boil our muddy mineral solution with its swarming bacteria for
 In the soft succulent condition in which they exist in
 The same is true of
only-the aerial dust being carefully excluded.
organisms sink to the bottom of the liquid, and without re-inoculation
 But the case is entirely different when
afloat in the air.

can live, or the minimum temperature at which they cease to live.
for example, they survive a temperature of 140°, and do not survive a
temperatures.

exposure to a temperature between 140° and 150° Fahr.
regarded as the death-point of the lymph, or rather of the particles
  If no
'death-point' is a vague one.
resist five hours' continuous exposure to the boiling temperature,
 below
 The fully developed soft bacteria of putrefying
a single minute's boiling--indeed, they are slain at about the same
  The same is true of the plastic, active
'Philosophical Transactions' for 1876, I pointed out and illustrated
between water-germs and air-germs; the growth from the already
developed bacteria.
development is associated with its preparedness for rapid
]
But, instead of choosing a putrefying liquid for inoculation, let us
way:-Let a small wisp of hay, desiccated by age, be washed in a glass
with the washing liquid.
infusion thus infected will often develope luxuriant bacterial life.
Precisely the same occurs if a turnip infusion be prepared in an
 The infusion in
subsequent resistance to sterilisation is often very great.
1st of March last I purposely infected the air of our laboratory with
  Ten groups
laboratory, and were afterwards subjected to the boiling temperature
  Out of the ten
for four hours.
for 15, 30, 45, 60, 75, 90, 105, 120, and 180 minutes respectively,
  The same is true of other vegetable
  On the 28th of February last, for example, I boiled six
atmosphere, for periods of 15, 30, 45, 60, 120, and 180 minutes.
flask of the group subsequently developed organisms.
in the case of three flasks, the boiling was prolonged to 240, 300,

infallibly barren by five minutes' boiling, behave like the vegetable
  On the 30th of
beef and boiled for 60 minutes, 120 minutes, 180 minutes, 240 minutes,
  Every one of them became subsequently
mutton infusion prepared at the same time.
numbered by hundreds in which similar powers of resistance were

In the presence of such facts I would ask my colleague whether it is
evidence which led the conclusion that all living matter has its life
water.
moteless air maintained at a temperature of 90° Fahr, when inoculated
organisms so sensitive as to be killed by a few minutes' exposure to a
  But the extension of
warrant or justification.
argument itself.
by multiplied experiment the alleged destruction of all living matter
defusion.
therefore to the ground; and the argument that bacteria and their
212°, be spontaneously generated, is, I trust, silenced for ever.

executed with the view of rendering its results secure, the separate
nearly ten thousand.

origin, which will be always immense, there are the practical
to surgery and medicine.
already glanced, illustrates the manner in which beneficent results of


surgeon could not have failed to learn empirically that there was
operative skill.
renders innocuous.
 Lister operates and dresses
simplest manner, falls upon the wound, the lint and gauze employed in
  At
 Bartholomew's Mr.
without the spray; but, as regards the real point aimed at--the
septic bacteria--the practice in both hospitals is the same.
Commending itself as it does to the scientifically trained mind, the

Had space allowed, it would have given me pleasure to point out the
infectious disease, distinguishing arguments based on analogy--which,

[Footnote: 'Fortnightly Review,' November 1876, see article
'] of the truly excellent researches of a young and an
of what Pasteur has recently done with reference to the same subject.
Here we have before us a living _contagium_ of the most deadly power,

patience can accomplish, by their admirable observations on the life
]  We find it in the blood or spleen of a
  When these
microscope, we soon see them lengthening into filaments which lie, in
becoming coiled into knots of a complexity not to be unravelled.
finally see those filaments resolving themselves into innumerable
distinguished microscopically from the harmless germs of Bacillus
  The bacterium of splenic fever is called Bacillus
  This formidable organism was shown to me by M.
Paris last July.
plays pathologically certainly rank amongst the most remarkable
  Observer after observer had strayed
conclusions and mutually destructive theories being the result.
association with a younger physiological colleague, M.
Pasteur struck in amidst the chaos, and soon reduced it to harmony.
They proved, among other things, that in cases where previous
splenic fever, another equally virulent factor was simultaneously
  Splenic fever was often overmastered by septicaemia, and
of pathological inferences regarding the character and cause of the
  Combining duly the two factors, all the previous
fullest explanation.
investigation, the words wherewith Pasteur himself feelingly alludes
me with especial force: 'J'ai tant de fois éprouvé que dans cet art
pas, et que l'interprétation des faits nest pas moins périlleuse.
[Footnote: Comptes-Rendus,' lxxxiii.
 177.



********************
XIV  SCIENCE AND MAN.

Midland Institute, October 1877; with additions.

the metal is not only attracted but repelled, the final approach to
forces.
or polar action.
partial retreat, every amelioration is associated more or less with
  No great mechanical improvement, for example, is
hardly upon individuals.
the operation of this polar law, what is good for it under one aspect

Science demands above all things personal concentration.
the study of the mathematician, the quiet laboratory of the

the man of action.
intercourse, the railway, the telegraph, and the post-office, which
injuriously on the man of science.
concentrativeness which, as I have said, is an absolute necessity to

The men who have most profoundly influenced the world from the
  Faraday, at a
  Darwin

scientific questions.
world which no man, be he a scientific student or otherwise, can
right relations with his fellow-men--the performance of his duty, not
  It is duty in
desire for repose, that has placed me in your presence here to-night.

judge of the total scientific achievement of any age, the standpoint
  We may, however, transport
completeness the science of our time.
and contrasted to its disadvantage with the science of other times.
do not think that this will be the verdict of posterity.
the contrary, that posterity will acknowledge that in the history of
those which this age has made its own.
these I propose, with your permission, to make the subject of our

It is now generally admitted that the man of to-day is the child and
  His physical and
through phases of history and forms of existence which lead the mind
 One of the qualities which he has derived
the otherwise bewildering flux of phenomena.
the German Lichtenberg as 'das rastlose Ursachenthier'--the restless
the sources from which they spring.
history of the world has this longing been more liberally responded
last thirty or forty years.
a feature of our time that the man of science no longer limits his
far as it is possible to share, with the world at large the fruits of

The celebrated Robert Boyle regarded the universe as a machine; Mr.
Carlyle prefers regarding it as a tree.
umbrageous Igdrasil better than that of the Strasburg clock.
machine may be defined as an organism with life and direction outside;

Carlyle.
and not imposed from without, the expression of fixed law and not of
Clockmaker.
other after all.
agree.
interaction of parts, and the subordination of the individual powers

Never were the harmony and interdependence just referred to so clearly
  Our insight regarding them is not that vague and
times, was more frequently affirmed by the synthetic poet than by the
  The interdependence of our day has become
directly into that inexorable reign of law which so many gentle people
  In the domain now under review men of science had
into day.
  It is not
intellectual splendour without the parentage of antecedent thought.
Great discoveries grow.
seed, then the ear, then the full corn in the ear, the last member of
 Thus, as regards the discovery of
or less clear concerning it had entered many minds before Newton's
demonstration.
inductions of Kepler.
thoughts were rooted in their thoughts, and a just distribution of

Scientific theories sometimes float like rumours in the air before
  The doom of a doctrine is often
accepted, long prior to the demonstration of either the error or the

Perpetual motion was discarded before it was proved to be opposed to
forces, intimations of modern discoveries are strewn through the

Confining ourselves to recent times, Dr.
some singularly sagacious remarks bearing upon this question, which
  Roget's penetration
  Mohr had grasped in 1837 some deep-lying
  The writings of Faraday furnish frequent illustrations of his
  'I have long,' he writes in
believe, with other lovers of natural knowledge, that the various
common origin, or, in other words, are so directly related and
another, and possess equivalence of power in their action.
researches on magneto-electricity, on electro-chemistry, and on the
  At an early
 Justice Grove made his mark upon this question.
though starting from a metaphysical basis, grasped eventually the
experimentally.
truth at heart, and who in his dealings with scientific history keeps
every fresh accession to historic knowledge must be welcome.
every new-comer of proved merit, more especially if that merit should
recognition or his reverence.
literature has as yet brought to light a claim which can sensibly
call them, whose names in relation to this subject are linked in
  These names are Julius Robert Mayer and

In his essay on 'Circles' Mr.
pictured intellectual progress as rhythmic.
knowledge is surrounded by a barrier which marks its limit.
gradually gathers clearness and strength until by-and-by some thinker
within which thought once more entrenches itself.
force again accumulates, the new barrier is in its turn broken, and
  Thus,
instead of progressing at a uniform rate.

 Joule first proved that a weight of one pound, falling
amount of heat competent to warm a pound of water one degree
disappeared, he broke an Emersonian 'circle,' releasing by the act an
embodied itself in the great doctrine known as the 'Conservation of
' This doctrine recognises in the material universe a constant
fluctuations are incessantly going on.
were alive, the thrill and interchange of its energies resembling
  The parts of the 'stupendous whole' shift and
which they are the parts remains quantitatively immutable.
because when change occurs it is always polar--plus accompanies minus,
an absolutely equal change of some other item in the opposite

*****
The sun warms the tropical ocean, converting a portion of its liquid
heights, returning in rivers to the ocean from which it came.
the point where condensation begins, an amount of heat exactly
work of lifting the vapour to the mountain-tops has disappeared from
  What is the gain corresponding to this loss?  It will
  The loss
masses and molecules.
been lifted to a position from which it can fall; molecules which have
recondense.
pulling the showers down upon the hills, and the rivers thus created
  Every raindrop which smites the
course develops heat by the clash of its cataracts and the friction of
  In the act of condensation, moreover, the molecular work of
  'Compare, then, the primitive
the vapour, and by the subsequent fall of the water from cloud to sea.
They are mathematically equal to each other.
was formed and lifted without being paid for in the currency of solar
quantitative restitution of that heat.
physical nature, no expenditure without equivalent gain, no gain
  With inexorable constancy the one
spontaneity to mingle with the pure and necessary play of natural
  Has this uniformity of nature ever been broken?  The reply is:
'Not to the knowledge of science.

whole of inorganic nature.
chemistry.
definite amount of heat being produced by the combustion of a given
  But zinc may also be burnt in a liquid which
  It does not in
capable of accurate measurement.
falls short of that produced in pure oxygen, the reason being that to
hydrogen.
missing heat is absorbed.
cause them to recombine; the heat developed is mathematically equal to
  Thus in pulling the oxygen and hydrogen asunder an
reunion.

  It is not my
instrument, but simply, by means of it, to show what varying shapes a
quantitative stability.
electric current passes through Grove's battery, zinc is consumed in
that when no current passes no zinc shall be consumed.
current, whatever it may be, possesses the power of generating heat
  We can fuse with it iridium, the most refractory
that at any terrestrial distance from the battery itself.

raise a given length of platinum wire, first to a blood-heat, then to
  The heat under these
quantity of zinc is no longer constant, but it varies inversely as the
  If the outside heat be nil, the inside heat
internal heat falls slightly short of the maximum.
rendered red-hot, the quantity of missing heat within the battery is
greater still.
by the combustion of a given weight of zinc, and you have an
  The heat generated without is so much lost
changes already adverted to coming here conspicuously into play.
in a variety of ways we can distribute the items of a never-varying
creative power in our hands.

effect chemical decomposition at a distance from the battery.
for example, decompose water into oxygen and hydrogen.
generated in the battery under these circumstances by the combustion
is no decomposition.
perfectly exact answer.
heat absorbed in the decomposition is accurately restored, and it is
  We may, if we
to the polar regions, and liberate it there.
a hearth on which fuel is consumed; but the heat of the combustion,
may be first liberated at the other side of the world.

scientific men, and which could not be solved until the bearing of the
was understood.
decompose water.
  The solution of an
the amount of heat required to decompose an equivalent of water, and
possess.
develop an amount of heat slightly in excess of that needed for the
  The two-celled battery is therefore rich
referred to within its own cells.

usually composed of small bars of bismuth and antimony soldered
  The electric current is here evoked by warming
  Like the Voltaic
decomposition, magnetise iron, and deflect a magnetic needle at any
  You will be disposed, and rightly disposed,
communicated to the face of the pile, but the case is worthy of closer
  In 1826 Thomas Seebeck discovered thermo-electricity,
with singular felicity to our aid in determining the material used up
  He found that when a
of the two metals was always heated, but that when the direction was
  Now the current in
heated junction--a direction in which it cannot possibly establish
  This heat
  Thus the heat generated by the
the pile, which has been first transmuted into electricity, and then
  As
condenser, and there assumes its primitive form without gain or loss,
electric current, which is, as it were, recondensed into heat in the

In my youth I thought an electro-magnetic engine which was shown to me
performed work without the expenditure of power.
action of such a machine.
from a lower to a higher level.
the engine we find that the zinc consumed does not yield its full
  The quantity of heat thus missing within is the exact
  Let the
  Add
and magnetical, of the engine; we thus obtain the precise amount of
  All the effects obtained from the
I would repeat, the inexorable method of nature.

or perform on its own account the smallest modicum of work.
machine distributes, but it cannot create.
to be classed among machines?  When I lift a weight, or throw a stone,
actually creating and expending force?  Let us look at the antecedents
  We derive the muscle and fat of our bodies from what
  Animal heat you know to be due to the slow combustion of this
  My arm is now inactive, and the ordinary slow combustion of my
  For every grain of fuel thus burnt a
  I now contract
  The
heat being liberated in the muscle itself.

vertical space of a foot.
contraction have not developed in the muscle their due amount of heat.
A quantity of heat is at this moment missing in my muscle which would
degree Fahrenheit.
by its collision generates the precise amount of heat missing in the
  My muscular heat is thus transferred from its local hearth to
  The fuel is consumed in my body, but the heat of
  The case is substantially the
produces external heat.
force we employ in muscular exertion is the force of burning fuel and
  In the light of these facts the body is seen to
solids and liquids of the Voltaic battery.
falls into the catagory of machines.

battery--heat platinum wires, decompose water, magnetise iron, and
  The combustion of muscle may be made to
produce them.
coil of wire may be caused to rotate between the poles of a magnet.
long as the two ends of the coil are unconnected we have simply to
the handle.
thin platinum wire a sudden addition of labour is thrown upon the
  When the necessary labour is expended, its equivalent
  The platinum wire glows.
maintain it at a white heat, or even fuse it.
remarkable result.
100 degrees, we extract the temperature of molten platinum, which is
  The miracle here is the reverse of that
  There the bush burned, but
  The
heats an external wire is too obvious to need pointing out.
machine is used to decompose water, the heat of the muscle, like that
when the gases recombine.
the muscles may be bottled up, carried to the polar regions, and there

*****
The matter of the human body is the same as that of the world around
of inorganic nature.
animal body a creator of force.
effectual beyond all others in transforming and distributing the

'Vital force' this is a great result.
has been described by a competent authority as 'the grandest of all.
I subscribe to this opinion, and honour correspondingly the man who
  He was no pope, in the
be held in honour as long as science endures I have already named him
 Joule.
eminent men took up this subject subsequently and independently, but
merits of Dr.

Consider the vigour of his reasoning.
internal heat, the animal organism can generate heat external to
  A blacksmith by hammering can warm a nail, and a savage by
  Unless, then, we
heat out of nothing, we are driven to the conclusion that it is the
calorific effect of the oxidation within the body.
not only states the principle, but illustrates numerically the
  A bowler who imparts a
  ball consumes in the act 0.
grain of carbon.
track of the ball, being developed there by mechanical friction.
man weighing 150 lbs.
8 feet the heat of a grain of carbon.
heat is restored.
 4 drs.
  of carbon

the combustion of the foregoing amount of carbon is restored.
muscles of a labourer whose weight is 150 lbs.
 When
 Were the oxidation corresponding to
would be wholly consumed in 80 days.
sustain the heart's action concentrated on the heart itself, it would
  And if we confine our attention to the two
in 31 days.
sample did Mayer, between 1842 and, 1845, deal with the great question

In direct opposition, moreover, to the foremost scientific authorities
was led by his calculations to maintain that the muscles, in the main,
previously considered a mere heat-producer, into the motive power of
  Mayer's prevision has been justified by events, for the

We place, then, food in our stomachs as so much combustible matter.
is first dissolved by purely chemical processes, and the nutritive
  Here it comes into contact with
  It unites with the oxygen
  The matter-products

  The force-products are also the same--heat
  Thus far every
chemistry.
  What
will?  The answer is, the action of the will is mediate, not direct.
Over and above the muscles the human organism is provided with long
column, being connected by it on the one side with the brain, and on
  Those filaments or
sensor and motor, or, if you like the terms better, afferent and
  The former carry impressions from the external world
muscles.
of Mayer, who was the first clearly to formulate the part played by
  Mayer saw that neither nerves nor brain,
but he also saw that the nerve could lift a latch and open a door, by
 'As an engineer,' he says with
loosening a detent can liberate an amount of mechanical energy almost
the muscles, can unlock an amount of power out of all proportion to
'  The nerves, according to
in the muscles.

The quickness of thought has passed into a proverb, and the notion
the feeling of the injury would have been rejected as preposterous
  Nervous impressions, notwithstanding the results of
events with the rapidity of electricity.
1851, affirmed, as the result of experiment, nervous transmission to
  His

Sound in air moves at the rate of 1,100 feet a second; sound in water
rate of 186,000 miles a second, and electricity in free wires moves
  But the nerves transmit their messages at
times might well be regarded as inordinately slow.

 Gore, has produced by electrolysis a kind of
nervous propagation.
condition that when you scratch or heat one end of the rod, the
onward march of the disturbance being announced by the development of
  In some such way the
 Gore
the nutritive blood winds up exhausted nerves, the comparison would be
  The subject may be summed up, as Du Bois-Reymond has summed
tail.
the disturbance could reach the brain.
arrival has to diffuse itself and throw the brain into the molecular
  Then, and not till then, the

that more than two seconds transpire between the infliction of the
  The interval
suffice for the destruction of the brain by lightning, or even by a
  Before the organ can arrange itself it may, therefore,
painless.


liberation of vast stores of muscular power by an infinitesimal
  We all know the effect
affright.
minute fraction of that necessary to raise the thousandth of a grain
into a powerful mechanical spasm, followed by violent respiration and
  The eye of course, may be appealed to as well as the
  Of this the lamented Lange gives the following vivid

smoking, sleeping, newspaper reading, or the digestion of food
  A servant enters the
.
  Jonas
  have failed.
flies.
the room, descends to the counting-house, dictates letters, and
  He jumps into his carriage, the horses snort,
his commercial friends.
home, where he throws himself once more into his easy chair with a
for further reflection.

is evoked by the impact upon the retina of the infinitesimal waves of
  We have, as
victory compressed into a moment.
out of his chair?  The contraction of his muscles.
muscles contract?  An impulse of the nerves, which lifted the proper
  Whence this impulse?  From
  But how did it originate there?
its origin in the human soul.

the known.
  You
railway days, was taken to see the performance of a locomotive.
had never known carriages to be moved except by animal power.
explanation outside of this conception lay beyond his experience, and
  After long reflection therefore, and seeing no
companion, 'Es muessen doch Pferde darin sein '--There must be horses
  Amusing as this locomotive theory may seem, it illustrates a

With reference to our present question, some may be disposed to press
speaking-tubes, through which messages are sent from the man to the
whispers of the world are sent back to the man.
us where is the man.
messages through the bodily organism?  Do not the phenomena point to
as through a skilfully constructed instrument?  You picture the
and you picture the sensor nerves as the vehicles of incoming
assumption of an entity which uses it?  In other words, are you not
soul?
This is fair reasoning now, and at a certain stage of the world's
  Adequate
minds, this hypothesis considered scientifically increases our
  You do not in this case explain the unknown in terms of the
explain the unknown in terms of the more unknown.
visualise this soul as an entity distinct from the body, and the
  From the side of science all that we
calculation of Lange's merchant, are psychical phenomena produced by,
in a previously prepared brain.

man of science equally dare to confess ignorance where it prevails.
What then is the causal connection, if any, between the objective and
answer is: I do not see the connection, nor have I as yet met anybody

It is no explanation to say that the objective and subjective effects
  Why should the

two-sidedness.
upon a window-pane?  If not, why should the molecular motion of the
form a coherent picture of the physical processes--the stirring of the
and all the subsequent mechanical motions of the organism.
present to our minds no picture of the process whereby consciousness
this series of actions.
pin suffices to prove that molecular motion can produce consciousness.
The reverse process of the production of motion by consciousness is
  We are here, in fact, upon the
fail to extricate us from our difficulties.
canons, we must deny to subjective phenomena all influence on physical
  Observation proves that they interact, but in passing from
to fill.
difficult to seize mentally as the idea of a soul.
content to make your 'soul' a poetic rendering of a phenomenon which
object to this exercise of ideality.
uncertainty, however, there is one practical point as clear as the
as its darkness and disaster, depend to a great extent upon our own

Accustomed as I am to harsh language, I am quite prepared to hear my
' The
assuredly very different things.
kills.
 John extends the notion of a soul to 'souls washed
ideality is censurable, Christ himself ought not to have escaped
  Nor did he escape it.
eat?' expressed the sceptical flouting of unpoetic natures.
still amongst us.
Protestant who rejects the doctrine of transubstantiation that he
of the Lord' in the sacrament to a mere figure of speech.

of ancient conceptions, when done consciously and above board, has, in
  We are not radically different from
profoundly, requires only appropriate clothing to affect us.
world will not lightly relinquish its heritage of poetic feeling, and
scientific discovery and consents to be ranked as a kind of poetry.
good symbol,' says Emerson, 'is a missionary to persuade thousands.
The Vedas, the Edda, the Koran, are each remembered by its happiest
  There is no more welcome gift to men than a new symbol.
assimilate themselves to it, deal with it in all ways, and it will
  Then comes a new genius and brings another.
Our ideas of God and the soul are obviously subject to this symbolic
  They are not now what they were a century ago.
not be a century hence what they are now.
kind of central energy in the human mind, capable, like the energy of
various transformations.
mechanic who would carve them to dogmatic forms.
themselves freely to the poet who understands his vocation, and whose
woven into our subjective life, but which refuse to be mechanically

*****
We now stand face to face with the final problem.
brain, and the moral and intellectual processes known to be associated
associated--subject to the laws which we find paramount in physical
nature equally 'bound fast in fate'?  From this latter conclusion,
understanding, the great German thinker Fichte recoiled.
find the record of this struggle between head and heart in his book,

 William Smith of Edinburgh; Truebner,
]  Fichte was determined at all hazards to maintain his freedom,
  To
nature, he turned defiantly round upon nature and law, and affirmed
  He was not going to
  There is a good
be able to bring into play the solvent transcendentalism whereby

Why do some regard this notion of necessity with terror, while others
in destiny is the bias of all earnest minds?  'It is not Nature,' says
terrible disorders incident to our race are produced.
cruellest enemy of man.
emerges, and it is the possible loosening of this responsibility that
  The notion of necessity certainly failed to
  He thought it untrue even absurd--but he did
  He showed, on the contrary, in
theories of free-will and necessity would come to the same in the end.

events without antecedents?--of starting, as it were, upon a creative
Let us consider the point.
reason why a tree should fall, it will not fall; and if there be
act.
persuade me that I have not, at this moment, the power to lift my arm
  Within this range the conscious freedom of my
  But what about the origin of the 'wish'?
create our wishes, motives, and tendencies to action?  Adequate
  What, for example,
some will consider my total being, and others a most potent factor of
As stated at the beginning of this discourse, my physical and
  Processes in the


world as sheets of white paper on which the age can write anything it
  The
cannot create them.
circumstances the great moulders of human character, was obliged to
circumstances.
because they are not to our taste.
bodily, are transmitted to us by inheritance?  In our courts of law,
influence of insanity, the best guidance the judge and jury can have
  If among
the prisoner's favour is enormously enhanced, because the experience
transmitted from parent to child.

our largest prisons.
man, possessed of wide experience gathered in various parts of the
  He told
distinct classes.
never to have been in prison.
taint, had brought them within the grasp of the law, and what had
  They were essentially
  Then came
moral or immoral, plastic to the touch of circumstances, which could
  Thirdly came
and no discipline tame.
'incorrigible', wickedness being stamped, as it were, upon their
  It was an unpleasant truth, but as a truth it ought to
  For such criminals the prison over which he ruled was
  If confined at all, their prison
example could not taint the moral air.
disposed to regard as a cheap and appropriate substitute for the
  It seemed to him evident that the State would benefit if
class educated; and prisoners of the third class put compendiously

It is not, however, from the observation of individuals that the
principal force.
when extended to the race.
the outcries and denunciations which rang discordant through the land
 Darwin's 'Origin of
'  Well, the world--even the clerical world--for the most part
 Darwin's book simply reflects the
have come to the front through almost endless stages of promotion from

If to any one of us were given the privilege of looking back through
vision, according to Darwin, would ultimately reach a point when the
  From that
up of their best qualities, a better one emerged; from this again a
through ages of amelioration, we came to be what we are to-day.
this generation had no conscious share in the production of this grand
  Any and every generation which preceded us had
  The favoured organisms whose garnered
to what we in our ignorance are obliged to call accidental variation;'
suffrages were not collected.
precision Mr.
poetry, but not out of the atmosphere of truth, when he ascribes the
righteousness.
and capacities, are given to us without our being consulted; and if,
wishes, we are not masters of the circumstances in which motives and
actions--in what sense can these actions be said to be the result of


responsibility, which, as it has been much talked of lately, it is
  With the view of removing the fear of our falling
by certain writers, I propose to grapple with this question in its
  'If,' says the
right have you to hold me responsible for my deeds?' The reply is,
injurious forces, whether they be bond or free, forces of nature or
'  'Then,' retorts the criminal, 'you punish me for
'  'Let it be granted,' says society, 'but had you
you, you might have "helped.
frankly out.
enough that with a view to our own safety and purification we are
action in our midst.
the right to cage or kill as we should a wild beast.
is a matter of more importance than the very limited chance of your
neck may furnish to others about to do as you have done the precise
  If your act be such as to invoke a
punishment which we inflict.
child dreads the fire," it will make you think twice before venturing
  Observe, finally, the consistency of
  You offend, you say, because you cannot help offending,
  We punish, is our reply, because we cannot
  Practically, then, as Bishop
deeds of its criminals to be the products of free-will.
An eminent Church dignitary describes all this, not unkindly, as
' I think it worthy of his Grace's graver
]
'What,' I have heard it argued, 'is the use of preaching about duty,
incapable of profiting by advice?'  Who knows that he is incapable?
be a most important factor, unlocking moral energies which might
  If the preacher thoroughly
the list of forces employed by Nature herself for man's amelioration,
upon his tongue.
barrenness has been demonstrated beyond a doubt let the sentence go

years ago, attending a lecture given by a young man to a small but
  The aspect of the lecturer was earnest and
  He spoke of duty,
words which must have strengthened the sense of duty in the minds of
  No speculations regarding the freedom of the
good.
  He also spoke, if you will allow
time--the Chartist subject of 'levelling.
to be equal at night, and that one rises at six, while the other
so speaking be made himself the mouthpiece of Nature, which, as we
level, but by the encouragement and conservation of what is best.

criminal, I am assuming a state of things brought about by the
belief in freewill--a state, namely, in which a moral majority control
  The heart of man is deceitful
  Withdraw, then, our
condition of the race will be typified by the samples of individual
  We shall all, that is,
  From much that has been
house-room in many minds.
might be able to illustrate them by individual instances.

    To keep the wretch in order.

become disorderly; but I refuse to accept him as a sample of humanity.
'Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die' is by no means the
  To many of you the name
aware that at no man in England has the term 'atheist' been more
  There are, moreover, really few who have more
  Among
 Holyoake is a leader.
his followers to 'Eat and drink, for to-morrow we die'?  Not so.
the August number of the 'Nineteenth Century' you will find these
of mere material comfort is much worse.
Comtist championship of the working man, 'the championship of the
' He would place 'the leanest liberty which brought with it
full plate without it.
'atheistic' leader; and no Christian, I apprehend, need be ashamed of

Most heartily do I recognise and admire the spiritual radiance, if I
personally known to me.
signally, as regards the production of anything beautiful, religion
  Its professor and defender is sometimes at
  These differences depend upon primary
  It may
gladiators of the pulpit would call 'atheists' and 'materialists,'
morality, would contrast more than favourably with the lives of those
  When I say
terms, and not because atheism or materialism, when compared with many
any particular offensiveness for me.
scrupulous in their adherence to engagements, whose words are their
unknown; if I wanted a loving father, a faithful husband, an
him among the band of 'atheists' to which I refer.
of the most pronounced among them not only in life but in death seen
a 'hangman's whip,' with no hope of a heavenly crown, and still as
if their eternal future depended upon their latest deeds.

public, Faraday is often referred to as a sample of the association of
  I was locally intimate with him
observe how nearly his character approached what might, without
  He was strong but gentle,
dealings with men and women; and though he sprang from the body of the
flower of antecedent chivalry.
Christian religion necessary to Faraday's spiritual peace, but in what
himself as 'a very small and despised sect of Christians, known, if
of his days.

irresistible argument in favour of the association of dogmatic
  But, as already intimated, our
  In further illustration of this
whose character, including gentleness and strength, candour and
resembles that of the great Sandemanian, but who has neither shared
dominant a factor in Faraday's life.
 Charles Darwin,
of truth as was the patriarch to the command of God.
therefore, as so many desire, look upon Faraday's religious belief as
uninfluenced by that belief.
nature in its purer forms I am disposed to refer the excellence of

Superstition may be defined as constructive religion which has grown
  We may admit, with Fichte, 'that
many pernicious practices and to adopt many useful ones;' the real
stated by the same philosopher: 'In so far as these lamentations do
their dominion over the human mind we can well understand--but from
government has thereby become more difficult and expensive.
was spared the exercise of his own sagacity and penetration when, by
confession.
services for which in later times judges and policemen have to be
'
No man ever felt the need of a high and ennobling religion more
not escape the brand of 'atheist.
the power and sufficiency of morality in its own sphere.
consider,' he says, 'the highest which man can possess in the absence
  The moral man obeys the law of
does whatever reveals itself to him as his duty simply because it is
  Let not the impudent assertion be repeated that such an
consequences, is in itself impossible and opposed to human nature.
So much for Fichte.
  'I have no
wish to take that part of human nature which is independent of it.
Morality, philosophy, commerce, the various institutions and habits of
'  These
convictions.
higher strain than when it embodied the sentiment of duty in AEnone:
    And, because right is right, to follow right

Not in the way assumed by our dogmatic teachers has the morality of
  The power which has moulded us thus far
  What it has done
constitutions which take pleasure in the noble, the beautiful, and the
which find aloes bitter and sugar sweet.
delusions, nor will it stay its hand when such are removed.
rather than dogmas, have been its ministers--hunger and thirst, heat
pride, love, hate, terror, awe--such were the forces whose interaction
man's physical, intellectual, and moral nature, and such are the

You may retort that even on my own showing 'the power which makes for
the beliefs of religion, including the dogmas of theology and the


derived?--that they are not the products, instead of being the
Latter-Day Pamphlets that Carlyle corrects a reasoner, who deduced the
the cart before the horse, the real truth being that the belief in
  The bird's instinct to
built cathedrals, temples, and pyramids:
    Knowest thou what wove yon woodbird's nest
    Or how the fish outbuilt its shell,
    Such and so grew these holy piles
    Earth proudly wears the Parthenon
    And Morning opes with haste her lids
    O'er England's abbeys bends the sky
    For out of Thought's interior sphere
    And nature gladly gave them place,
    And granted them an equal date

Surely, many utterances which have been accepted as descriptions ought
aspiration instead of in objective knowledge.
herald angels, 'Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace,
human soul?  or does it describe an optical and acoustical fact--a
the yearning are man's imperishable possession--a ferment long
the race.
wrecked by non-fulfilment.
a comment on the promise of peace' on earth and goodwill toward men.
That promise is a dream ruined by the experience of eighteen
host' to prophetic vision.
untenable, the immortal song and the feelings it expresses are still
in the poetry, philosophy, and practice of the future.

solution of continuity into the presence of problems which, as usually
  To these
methods of research which in physical science have proved their truth
  There is on all hands a growing repugnance to invoke
the thoughtful minds just referred to, finding no trace of evidence in
social forces the genesis and development of man's moral nature.
they succeed in their search--and I think they are sure to
and the deepening sense of social duty will, it is to be hoped,
beset and disfigure our social life.
behoves us one and all to work; and devoutly wishing its consummation,
farewell.




  PROFESSOR VIRCHOW AND EVOLUTION.

growth of natural truth; but it may be that the plant is all the
  The
 Through
through savagery and barbarism his civilisation; and through illusion
frame.
withstood and overcome the opposing forces.
world before Knowledge; and thoughts, conceptions, and creeds, founded
  Such
want; otherwise their growth could not have been so luxuriant, nor
  This general need--this hunger for the
whose vocation it was to cultivate the mystery of life and its
which that mystery aroused.
alone, but in a mental world peopled with forms answering to his
  As time advanced--in other words, as the savage
until they finally emerged in the mythology and art of Greece:
    Where still the magic robe of Poesy

[Footnote:
    Da der Dichtung zauberische Huelle
'--Schiller.

celestial and otherwise, with all their retinue and appliances, being
nature and the phases of the human soul.
those among them who were mechanics, and not poets, claimed objective
evidence that which sprang from the innermost need and nature of man.
It is against this objective rendering of the emotions--this thrusting
essentially ideal and poetic--that science, consciously or
  Religious feeling is as much a verity as
subjective side, the waves of science beat in vain.
manipulated by the constructive imagination, mixed with imperfect or
feeling makes claims which traverse our knowledge of nature, science,
  It is
against the life and substance of religion, that Science enters her
 Sooner or later among thinking people, that scenery will be
the mystery of life and nature within the range of his capacities; as
of that which transcends all knowledge, and admits only of ideal

The signs of the times, I think, point in this direction.
example, the obvious aim of Mr.
wreck of dogma, the poetic basis of religion.
remembered that under the circumstances poetry may be the purest
  In other influential quarters a similar spirit is
  In a remarkable article published by Professor Knight of St.
Andrews in the September number of the 'Nineteenth Century,' amid
its first emergence into being is a miracle beside which all others
  But, as has often been pointed
world out of blank nonentity cannot be imagined; [Footnote: Professor
whose Collects begins thus: 'O God, who by thy mighty power halt made
] its emergence into order out of chaos when
doctrine of its slow evolution.
before the moral philosophy class of a Scotch university, while those
text.
years ago regarding the Book of Genesis.
indeed pathetic to me are those attempts of the opening mind of man to
  But the Book of Genesis has no voice
 _It is a poem, not a scientific treatise.
the former aspect it is for ever beautiful; in the latter it has been,
' My
  'Does the
non-vital?  Or was it created by a fiat of volition?  Or'--and here he
as an eternal constituent of the universe?  I do not see,' he replies,
' With the whole force of
'eternal constituent' may not be the same.

idea of force or motion from its attributes and from his definition.
Extension only was taken into account.
of matter to generate motion was assumed, its observed motions were
  God, resident outside of matter, gave
  In this connection the argument in Young's 'Night

    Shot through vast masses of enormous weight?
    Such various forms, and gave it wings to fly?
Against this notion of Descartes the great deist John Toland, whose
  He
of matter was at rest, and that even the most quiescent solids were
  The success of his
 Berthold,
Carl Winter.
monistic doctrine which is now so rapidly spreading.

Professor Knight, closely resembles the idea of motion entertained by
  Motion was then virtually asserted to
generated out of matter.
observed to move.
repository of forces impressed on it from without--the purely passive
  The logical form continues, but
  'The evolution of nature,' says
  But

scientific tests.
  Vitality, whether
sui generis, distinct from matter, and incapable of being generated
' It may be, however, that, in process of time, vitality
wrangling, take its place among the attributes of that 'universal

That 'matter is not itself alive' Professor Knight seems to regard as
  Let us place in contrast with this the notion
that Germany has produced.
'would, in my opinion, not be possible, if the process which here
in a vastly diminished degree.
flour.
in the same proportion sensations and feelings augment.
of these latter possessed by the first pair, is not simply diffused
feebly than the first.
referred back to the flour, where they exist, weak and pale it is
' [Footnote:
vol.
 p.
]  We may not be able to taste or smell alcohol in a
concentrated Kirschwasser.
to a still, which concentrates the sensation and feeling,

'Definitions,' says Mr.
September 1878.
  They
  No
' Thus Descartes's notion of
by a physiologist or a crystallographer of the present day.
not descriptions of the state of the question.
sometimes shows itself in distinguished quarters to bind us own to
are wholly incompatible with our present enlightenment.

by 'Democritus and the mathematicians.
as knowledge advances is in accordance both with sound sense and
  When, for example, the undulatory theory was
transverse to the direction of propagation.
at hand, which was a case of longitudinal vibration.
substitution of transverse for longitudinal vibrations in the case of
properties of the luminiferous medium.
far as to fill space with a substance, possessing the properties of a
the newly discovered facts imperatively demanded it.

effectually twit the holder of it on his change of front.
aether of yours,' he might say, 'alters its style with every change
  Starting as a beggar, with scarce a rag of 'property' to
wanted.
before you, you assumed your aether to be a gas in the last extremity
  But now that new service is rendered necessary by new
great and princely enough in all conscience; for it implies that not
all, fly through your hypothetical solid without perceptible loss of
' This would sound very cogent, but it would be very vain.
Equally vain, in my opinion, is Mr.
not justified in modifying, in accordance with advancing knowledge,

Before parting from Professor Knight, let me commend his courage as
  We have heard much of late of the peril to
  What Mr.
says under this head is worthy of all respect and attention.
admit,' he writes, 'that were it proved that the moral faculty was
invalidated.
grave, peremptory, and august; and an earthborn rule may be as
  It does not even
accompanied by a corresponding decay of belief in immortality, must

relation of cause and effect, may not the 'decay' and 'relaxation' be
antecedents?]  It is certain that it has often done so.
equally certain that there have been individuals, and great historical
weakened moral earnestness, nor prevented devotional fervour.
elsewhere stated that some of the best men of my acquaintance--men
assiduously let the belief referred to alone.
neither stimulus nor inspiration, while--I say it with regret--were I
character, are to be ranked with the unendowed, I should find some
belief.
wider data referred to by Professor Knight constitute, therefore, a
  Again, my excellent critic,
prophet; a rare, exceptional, and altogether transcendental
' [Footnote: 'Natural History of
 136.
pure human ethics, divorced not only from Brahma and the Brahminic
' [Footnote: Natural
 125.
from the North contrast pleasantly with the barbarous whoops which

*****
Looking backwards from my present standpoint over the earnest past, a
lies before me.
or want of appetite for knowledge, but simply from the fact that my
taught.
seriousness ran through my character; and many a sleepless night of my
was well versed in Scripture; for I loved the Bible, and was prompted
  Later on I
Rome, but the characteristic doctrines of that Church marked only for
  The eternal Sonship of Christ, for
  The
remember that a passage in Blair's 'Grave' gave me momentary rest.

    That rear'd the piece at first and took it down
    And put them as they were.

thought, my difficulties came back to me.
browsing upon churchyard grass, which sprang from the decaying mould
  The flesh of these animals was undoubtedly a
undoubtedly, in part, a more remote modification of the same
  I figured the self-same molecules as belonging first to
bodies so related could possibly arrange their claims at the day of
  The scattered parts of each were to be reassembled and
  But if handed over to the one, how could they
I concluded, could not reconcile the contradiction.
which Blair's mechanical theory of the resurrection brought
the waste ocean of speculation.

aspects of nature and the consciousness of man implied the operation
raised the temperature of the mind, though it refused to accept shape,
  Perhaps the able critics
do of Mr.
  They owe him nothing, and have a right to announce
  I, however, owe him a great deal, and am
  Few, perhaps, who are
him a sturdier front than I have, or in discussing modern science have
  But I could see that his contention at
physical science cannot satisfy.
him for his affirmation of the ethical and ideal side of human nature.
Be this as it may, at the period now reached in my story the feeling
same time rendered more earnest, resolute, and laborious by the
  Others also ministered to this result.
kindled me, while Fichte powerfully stirred my moral pulse.
The reader will find in the Seventeenth Lecture of Fichte's course on
of this philosopher.
theories or philosophic systems, but a great deal for the propagated
  In my later
physics had been picked up: my stock of both was, however, scanty, and
  But it was really with the view of learning
than with the desire of acquiring distinction in either science, that
the meagre funds then at my disposal to the study of science in

But science soon fascinated me on its own account.
and honestly out, moral qualities were incessantly invoked.
no room allowed for insincerity--no room even for carelessness.
edifice of science had been raised by men who had unswervingly
sacrificed interests which are usually potent in this world.
these rationalistic men of Germany I found conscientiousness in work
  And why, since
their disciples?  Because they assumed, and were justified in
would respond to their appeal.
something less noble the simple earnestness and fidelity to duty,
sons generally, it will not be because of rationalism.
decadent Germany might coexist with the most rampant rationalism
effect.

friend Professor Knoblauch, landed me in a region which harmonised
  It was essentially an enquiry in
perplexing, phenomena exhibited by crystals when freely suspended in
  I here lived amid the most complex operations of
force.
crystals operated on ranged themselves under these two heads.
and Pluecker had worked assiduously at the subject, and had invoked
  It was soon,
iron class by an atom of the bismuth class, involving no change of
  The
poles of the magnet, were driven, in the other case, from these poles.
By such instances and the reasoning which they suggested,
new forces, but to the modification of the old ones by molecular
  Whether diamagnetism, like magnetism, was a polar force,
  It was
magne-crystallic action were immediately shown to be simple mechanical
 These early
throughout which the molecular architecture of crystals was an
subsequent scientific thought, and their influence is easily traced in
  For example, during nine years of labour on
me, not as ends, but as instruments by the aid of which the mind might

Scientific progress depends mainly upon two factors which incessantly
illumination of phenomena by knowledge.
insight regarding physical processes which this interaction carries in
  Through such insight we are enabled to enter and explore
roots, and from which they derive nutrition.
place before the mind's eye atoms and atomic motions which lie far
stringent as that applied by the mechanician to the motions and
  But once committed to such
bounds of inorganic nature.
growth, I found myself more and more compelled to regard not only
of molecular architecture, infinitely more complex, it is true, than
mechanical laws.
speculations relating to these subjects, and attempts made, by
satisfactory image to the mind of the way in which plants and animals
  Perhaps I may be excused for noting a sample of these
which here finds a more suitable place than that which it formerly

*****
Sitting, in the summer of 1855, with my friend Dr.
shadow of a massive elm on the bank of a river in Normandy, the
regarded the tree above us.
had ascended, diverged into branches, and budded into innumerable
  What caused them to do so--a power external to themselves, or
therefore, consider from the other point of view the experience of the
  A low temperature had kept back for weeks the life of
  But at length the sun gained power--or, rather,
removed--and life immediately kindled under his warmth.
life, and how can solar light and heat thus affect it?  Near our elm
air.
  Each leaf moved
life was inherent and molecular.
motion--the forces which it implies, and the results which flow from
attract and repel each other.
each leaf to repel all the other points and to attract the roots, and
points.
magnets abandoned freely to the interaction of their own forces.
obedience to these they would arrange themselves, and finally assume
  Let us suppose the
equilibrium.
on the part of the leaves to re-establish it; and in making this
forms.
forces, the attraction would extend to them--a growth of the mass of

We have strong reason for assuming that the ultimate particles of
with forces coarsely typified by those here ascribed to the leaves.
The phenomena of crystallisation load, of necessity, to this
  Under the operation of such forces
take up positions from which they would never move if undisturbed by
  But solar light and heat, which come to us as
 On
the atomic equilibrium, which there is an immediate effort to restore.
The effort, incessantly defeated--for the waves continue to pour
gathered from the soil and from the atmosphere, and built, in
form of the tree.
might be defined as an unceasing effort to restore a disturbed
  In the building of crystals Nature makes her first
'vital force,' and the manifestations of this force in plants and
be regarded of the same mechanical quality as those concerned in the

Consider the cycle of operations by which the seed produces the plant,
returning with the fidelity of a planetary orbit to its original point
  Who or what planned this molecular rhythm?  We do not
all.
look at a drawing made a century ago, of one of the ancestors of that
  For a
  Butterflies have
molecular architecture unchanged.
persistency of recurrence?  We do not know; but we stand within our
wing which may not yet find its Newton to prove that the principles
brought into play in the formation of the solar system.
take a step further, and affirm that the brain of man--the organ of
assemblage of molecules, acting and reacting according to law.
however, the methods pursued in mechanical science come to an end; and
molecules the least of the phenomena of sensation or thought, I
  The association of both with the matter
rising of the sun.
mechanical connection between the sun and our organs, in the former
  Between molecular mechanics and
physical reasoning is incompetent to carry us.
accept the observed association as an empirical fact, without being

*****
Such were the ponderings which ran habitually through my mind in the
  They illustrate two things--a
legitimate limit; and an acknowledgment that physical considerations

the view of providing room for the play of considerations other than
  The same intellectual duality, if I may use the phrase,
'Physics and Metaphysics,' published in the 'Saturday Review' for

that of the past of the dependence of thought and feeling on physical
studied through organic combinations as we now study the character of
  We believe that
correlative--that it is accompanied by a certain breaking up and
  This latter process is
expanded, without the creation of any new faculty, it would doubtless
molecular state of the brain the character of the thought acting on
condition of the brain.
all-important--that the inference here referred to would be an _à
  But by observing, with the faculties we assume, the state
tabulated side by side that, if one were given, a mere reference to
  Our present powers, it is true,
it is because of its complexity and our limits that this is the case.
The quality of the problem and of our powers are, we believe, so
with the former.
our eyes exclusively to the past?  May it not be that a time is
upon this fair earth, starting from the gross human brain of to-day as
of commensurate extent?  Given the requisite expansibility to the
for their expansion--and this high goal may be attained.
is all that is required, and not a change of quality.
no absolute breach of continuity between us and our loftier brothers

We have guarded ourselves against saying that the inferring of thought
priori_.
the observation of the effects of food and drink upon the mind would
analytical insight which we suppose attained.
distances of the planets, we can infer the perturbations consequent on
  Given the nature of a disturbance in water,
infer how its particles will be affected.
physical laws.
which connects the phenomena, and from beginning to end there is no
  But when we endeavour to pass by a similar
problem which transcends any conceivable expansion of the powers which
  We may think over the subject again and again, but it
  We stand at length face to face
  The territory of physics is wide, but it
beyond.
all its forms--even in the muscles, blood, and brain of man
  Casting
the visible phenomena of life to mechanical attractions and
 Having thus exhausted physics, and reached its very rim, a
  We have, in fact, made no step
  And thus it will ever loom, compelling the

    As dreams are made of, and our little life
"
In my work on 'Heat,' published in 1863 and republished many times
Review.

all hazards to draw--that, namely, between what men knew or might
  Impart simple
brain itself might be brought into view.
the corresponding states of consciousness, and an empirical nexus
endeavour to pass by logical deduction from the one to the other.
Among these brain-effects a new product appears which defies
  We cannot deduce motion from consciousness or

established which are at least as valid as those of the deductive
  The difficulty may really lie in the attempt to convert a
 My
speak in reply to accusation.

prior to the 'Belfast Address,' is embodied in the following extract
molecules of the human body, instead of replacing others, and thus
and placed in the exact relative positions which they occupy in the
  Supposing them to have the same forces and distribution of
organised concourse of molecules stand before us as a sentient,
not.
axis, and sent revolving round the sun at a distance equal to that of
the development of organic forms?  I lean to the affirmative.
plain speaking, but it is without 'dogmatism.
expressed, a belief, a leaning--not an established 'doctrine.

of the weakness of science as an assertion of its strength.
I told the working men of Dundee that while making the largest demand
powerful as an instrument of intellectual culture, and as a ministrant
is likely in our day to solve, 'the problem of the universe,' I must
  I compare the mind of man to a musical
directions exists infinite silence.
come within our intellectual range; but behind, and above, and around
are concerned, is incapable of solution.

person possessing one idea, which so over-masters him that he is never
  That idea is the polar conception of the
respects and directions, and his powerlessness to take a single step
  In 1868, before the Mathematical and Physical Section of
well-worn note:
'In thus affirming the growth of the human body to be mechanical, and
the brain, the position of the "materialist," as far as that position
  I think the materialist will be able finally
can pass beyond it.
as insoluble in its modern form as it was in the pre-scientific ages.
Phosphorus is a constituent of the human brain, and a trenchant German
not be the case; but, even if we knew it to be the case, the knowledge
  On both sides of the zone here
  If you ask him
divided it into molecules, and impressed upon them this necessity of
  Science is also mute in
  But if the materialist is confounded and
lower our heads and acknowledge our ignorance, priest and philosopher,
'
*****
The roll of echoes which succeeded the Lecture delivered by Professor
  The
eagerly commented on in other journals.
delivered by me before the Midland Institute in the autumn of 1877,
  Professor Virchow
who by his reasonableness reproved my rashness, and by his depth
  With true theologic courtesy I was
thought,' but of 'common modesty' and 'common sense.
indebted to Professor Clifford for recalling in the 'Nineteenth
fancy to sober fact, I do not think a brief additional examination of
here.

English translation of his lecture--a preface written expressly by
  'Nothing,' he says, 'was farther from his intention than any
 Darwin to the
admiration than himself.
him to enter an energetic protest against the attempts that are made
of scientists as established science.
that it promotes the pernicious delusions of the Socialist, Virchow
is so great that he would brave the danger and teach the theory, if it
  'However dangerous the state of things might be,
hesitate to say that from the moment when we had become convinced that
that we could pledge our oath to it, so sure that we could say, "Thus
introducing it into our actual life, so as not only to communicate it
foundation of our whole ideas of the world, of society, and the State,
  This I hold to be
'
It would be interesting to know the persons designated by the pronoun
  No doubt
found on it his justification.
convinced that the theory of evolution is a perfectly established
introduction into our schools.
Virchow would not accept this retort as valid.
something more than Professor Haeckel.
even than the audience he addressed; for he would hardly affirm, even
that would be a sufficient warrant for forcing it upon the public at
  His 'we,' I submit, needs definition.
theory of evolution ought to be introduced into our schools, not when
for its introduction, then, I think, he is right, and that, as a
 Haeckel would be wrong in seeking to
  In dealing with the
their side.
social preparation will be impossible; an unwholesome divorce will be
natural process of leavening the social lump by discovery and

The burthen, however, of this celebrated lecture is a warning that a
experimentally proved and that which is still in the region of
  As to the latter, Virchow by no means imposes silence.
He is far too sagacious a man to commit himself, at the present time
  But he insists that it ought not to be
  'It ought,' as he
text.
only _possible_, not _actual_ truth--that it belongs to the region of
  As long as a problem
considers, to teach it in our schools.
represent our conjecture as a certainty, nor our hypothesis as a
' With regard to the connection between
willingly grant that we can find certain gradations, certain definite
purely physical, or of a physical character.
discourse I am not asserting that it will never be possible to bring
physical.
this _possible_ connection as _a doctrine_ of science.
paragraph be reiterates his position with reference to the
  'We must draw,' he
wish to _search for_.
problems (or hypotheses).
ready to communicate them to all the world_, and say "There is the
" .
.
problems, in which the whole nation may be interested, cannot be
  This is Freedom of Enquiry.
(or hypothesis) is not, without further debate, to be made _a
'  He will not concede to Dr.
for the schoolmasters to decide, whether the Darwinian theory of man's
the protoplastic soul be assumed as the foundation of all ideas
'  The Professor concludes his lecture thus:
" But
speculative knowledge, not the knowledge of hypotheses, but it was
  Gentlemen, I think we should be
teaching we restrict ourselves to this perfectly safe and unassailable
  From this domain _we may make incursions into the field of
all needful security and support.
sentences in the foregoing series of quotations; the other italics are

Virchow's position could not be made clearer by any comments of mine
  That position is one of the highest
  Throughout our whole German Fatherland,' he
system of education, and in inventing fixed forms in which to mould
  On the threshold of coming events stands the Prussian law of
  In all the German States larger schools are being built,
extended, "higher" and "middle" schools are founded.
the question, What is to be the chief substance of the teaching?' What
foregoing quotations.
between science in the state of hypothesis, and science in the state
  In school teaching the former ought to be excluded.
he assumes it to be still in its hypothetical stage, the ban of

*****
I now freely offer myself for judgment before the tribunal whose law
  First and foremost, then, I have never advocated
  I
had been better understood and its utility more fully recognised than
  The theory ought, I
argument, and opinion has won for it this recognition.
condition here, however, is that free discussion should not be
otherwise, as I said before, the work of social preparation cannot go
  On this count, then, I claim acquittal, being for the moment on

Besides the duties of the chair, which I have been privileged to
involved a word on my part, pro or con, in reference to the theory of
Belfast, and Birmingham; and in these addresses the theory of
been more or less touched upon.
references I have departed from the views of Virchow or not.

when applied to the primitive condition of matter, as belonging to
of experimental enquiry is here shut out,' I sketch the nebular theory
'Accepting some such view of the construction of our system _as
our planet with the past.
ancestry.
understand it, could not have been present on the earth.
did it come there?  The thing to be encouraged here is a reverent
licentiousness in speculation--while the thing to be repressed, both
  And here I am in the hands of
  _I have no right to
clouds, or gathering to more solid consistency in the modern
'
I then notice more especially the basis of the theory.
the doctrine of evolution _are by no means ignorant of the uncertainty
  They
of any proof of the illegality of the act, they prolong the method of
 Here the observed uniformity of
  Having determined the elements of their
curve into an antecedent world, and accept as probable the unbroken
' Thus it
exactly what Professor Virchow recommends, showing myself as careful
which did not belong to it.

the passage which has given rise to the most violent animadversion.
'Believing as I do in the continuity of nature, I cannot stop abruptly
  At this point the vision of
  By an
evidence, and discern in that "matter" which we, in our ignorance of
Creator, have hitherto covered with opprobrium, the promise and
' Without halting for a moment I go on
necessary.
evidence to prove that any form of life can be developed out of matter
perfectly conclusive by many has been adduced, and that were we to
our belief, we should eagerly close with the evidence referred to.
there is in the true man of science a desire stronger than the wish to
 And
evidence offered in favour of "spontaneous generation" to be vitiated
  They know full well that the chemist now
some time ago regarded as the products solely of vitality.
intimately acquainted with the structural power of matter, as
  They can justify
conditions, to produce organisms.
they will frankly admit their inability to point to any satisfactory
antecedent life.
3, p.
]
Comparing the theory of evolution with other theories, I thus express
experimental demonstration--for the subject is hardly accessible to
thought.
strength.
whose garment is seen in the visible universe into an Artificer,
is seen to act.
see around us and feel within us--the phenomena of physical nature as
cosmical life, if I dare apply the term, an infinitesimal span of
' Among thinking people,
that of a personal artificer.
for the theory of evolution which can reasonably be refused.

 Hooker at Norwich in 1868 [Footnote:
] 'since the
therefore not too early now to ask what progress that bold theory has
  Since the "Origin" appeared it has

  Bane and
] two
Italian edition.
past [the 'Athenaeum' had stated it to be so] it is an accepted
will always be understood, a considerable proportion who are not
 Darwin assigns to it.
In the following year, at Innsbruck, Helmholtz took up the same
 [Footnote: 'Noch besteht lebhafter Streit um die Wahrheit oder
eigentlich nur um die Grenzen, welche wir fuer die Veraenderlichkeit
  Dass innerhalb derselben Species erbliche
koennen, ja dass viele der bisher als verschiedene Species derselben
auch seine Gegner kaum leugnen.
)]  Another
enormous progress made by the theory during that time.
outward and visible signs of this advance are readily indicated.
hostility and fear which so long prevented the recognition of Mr.
Darwin by his own university have vanished, and this year Cambridge,
  The
its doors against Mr.
lectures, and published articles plainly show that even the clergy
  My
 Darwin in the Birmingham Address was based upon
going on.

disturb this progress of public faith in the theory of evolution, I do
  That the special lessons of caution which he inculcates
subject, has been proved in the foregoing pages.
he had preceded me instead of following me, and if my desire had been
this more completely.
coincident lines still further, for most of what he has said about
  I share his
passage from matter which we now hold to be inorganic into organised
other of the earth's history there occurred what would be now called
' I agree with him that the proofs of it are
'  'Whoever,' he says, recalls to mind the lamentable
support for the _generatio aequivoca_ in the lower forms of transition
demand that this theory, so utterly discredited, should be in any way
' I hold with Virchow
discredited.
dwell upon it further.

connects me by name.
'to your saying that atoms of carbon also possess mind, or that in
do not know how I am to perceive this.
had said seventeen years previously in the 'Saturday Review.
Professor continues: 'If I explain attraction and repulsion as
out of the window, and the Psyche ceases to be a Psyche.
in passing, that the Psyche that could be cast out of the window is
  At this point the translator, who is evidently a
  'As an illustration of
Doctor Tyndall arrives respecting the hypothesis of a human soul,
phenomena--psychical phenomena, as he calls them.
content to make your soul a poetic rendering of a phenomenon which
object to this exercise of ideality.
Address delivered before the Birmingham and Midland Institute, October
  Fortnightly Review,' Nov.
 60]  Professor
clearly see how the quotation from me subserves this purpose.
not even know whether I am cited as meriting praise or deserving
  In a far coarser fashion this utterance of mine has been
few words upon it.

pain.
with comparative slowness along the nerves affected; and only when it
  Those who think
strictly interpreted, is atomic motion, is, in such a case, propagated
  Again, on feeling the
  What has caused this motion
along the motor nerves to the proper muscles, and, their force being
  But what moved the
be replied.
consciousness, make matter move?  Not all the sense of pain or
should it stir a molecule?  Try to express the motion numerically in
  Hence
special prominence, that the physical processes are complete in
at all implicated.
by-product inexpressible in terms of force and motion, and unessential

Four years ago, I wrote thus: 'Do states of consciousness enter as
bodily actions?  Speaking for myself, it is certain that I have no
brain, and influencing the transference of motion among the molecules.
The thing "eludes all mental presentation.
seems to belong to the logic which claims for the brain an automatic
  But it is, I believe, admitted
are produced by the motion of the molecules of the brain; and this
unpresentable to the mental vision as the production of molecular
  If I reject one result I must reject both.
I, however, reject neither, and thus stand in the presence of two
' Here I secede
my esteem, and fall back upon the avowal which occurs with such
utter incapacity to grasp the problem.

Professor Virchow's translator draws attention.
ask, is the causal connection between the objective and the
My answer is: I do not see the connection, nor am I acquainted with
  It is no explanation to say that the objective

of the difficulty.
do exhibit this two-sidedness.
runs into frost-ferns upon a window pane?  If not, why should
companion--consciousness?  We can form a coherent picture of all the
the nerves, the discharging of the muscles, and all the subsequent
  We are here dealing with mechanical problems

But we can form no picture of the process whereby consciousness
of this series of actions.
motion by consciousness is equally unpresentable to the mind.
here in fact on the boundary line of the intellect, where the ordinary
  If we are true to these
processes.
state of consciousness and a group of molecules in the relation of
  Observation proves them to interact; but, in passing
deduction is unable to fill.
conclusion at which I had arrived more than twenty years ago.
bare unsparingly the central difficulty of the materialist, and tell
'almost as difficult to be seized mentally as the idea of a soul.
further, and say, in effect, to those who wish to retain this idea,
soul as a Psyche which could be thrown out of the window--an entity
brain, but which on due occasion, such as the intrusion of a bullet or
abandoning this heathen notion, you consent to approach the subject in
your soul a poetic rendering of a phenomenon which, as I have taken
physical laws--then I, for one, would not object to this exercise of
' I say it strongly, but with good temper, that the
putting the question in this light is guilty of black ingratitude.


points in Professor Virchow's lecture to which I should feel inclined
  I think it was hardly necessary to associate the
it was correct to do so.
of its extreme leaders, is to overthrow the existing systems of
whether it be atheism or papal infallibility.
Socialists saw Church and State united against them, and both were
  But no sooner does a serious
Socialists begin immediately to dally with the former.
'Geschichte des Materialismus,' 2e Auflage, vol.
 p.
]  The

by a scientific theory which the best and soberest heads in the world
in his 'Popular Lectures' describes Darwin's theory as embracing 'an
schoepferischen Gedanken), and who illustrates the greatness of this
of, which it offers of the enigmas of life and organisation.
points to the clouds of error and confusion which it has already
enunciation is simply a record of the approach of the theory towards
  One point in this 'popular' exposition
  Helmholtz refers to the dominant
nations have kept abreast of her in the investigation of inorganic
  He claims for German men the credit of pursuing with
without any immediate prospect of practical utility, the cultivation
  But that which has determined German superiority in
this.
psychological and ethical questions; and he claims for his countrymen
the truth may here carry along with it, than reigns among the
  And why is this the case?  'England and
to follow up and illustrate with vigorous energy the methods of
social and theological prejudices, and could only utter their
usefulness.
  She has
truth carries with it the antidote against the bane and danger which
  A cheerfully laborious and
truth full in the face.
of one-sided theories, even when these may appear to threaten the
' These words of Helmholtz are, in my opinion, wiser
than those which express the fears of Professor Virchow.
remembered that at the time of his lecture his chief anxieties were
evidence of her ability to crush, not only Socialists, but
bear.

another utterance not less noble, which I trust was understood and
  'If,' said the
we could lay down beforehand the precise limits of possible knowledge,
  But the
is, not merely whether he is able to solve this or that problem; but
which he has to deal, as to weave them into a definite problem at
.
 If his eye seem dim, he must look steadfastly and with hope
definite forms.
with sympathetic trust to the intricate whisperings of Nature--the
there he can pick out a few simple notes to which his own powers can
  If, then, at a moment when he finds himself placed on a
the range of science, and to tell us what he can see from his vantage
of the horizon, and after describing the most distant of well-defined
impressions which he is conscious of receiving from regions beyond; if
should explain why he thinks this a mere blind alley and that an open
listen calmly, and temperately to form our own judgment on what we
confounding matters of fact with matters of opinion, if we failed to
discourse, and assumed that they had been all put on the same
'
*****
While largely agreeing with him, I cannot quite accept the setting in
secure an experimental basis for the doctrine of spontaneous
  It is not a doctrine 'so discredited' that some of the
views of life.
  They
sufficient by Bishop Butler for practical guidance in the gravest
once formed a continuous mass; that in the course of untold ages,
space, went on, the planets were detached; and that our present sun is
planets were successively separated.
possible for aeons subsequent to this separation.
appear?  I have already pressed this question, but have received no
 [Footnote: In the 'Apology for the Belfast Address,' the
]  If, with Professor Knight, we regard the
not as a statement of fact, where are we to seek for guidance as to
cobweb to oppose to the hypothesis, which ascribes the appearance of
evolution.
Professor Virchow, not to sever the organic world from the whole, as
' This grave statement
Co.

compared with those which encumber its rivals.
facts in science obviously connected, and whose connections we are
by the intrusion of a separable spiritual agent.
though we are unable to trace the course of things from the nebula,
abounds, the spirit and practice of science pronounce against the
  Theologians must liberate
by thoughtful minds.
never given to man.
assertion of knowledge than a protest against the assumption of
to which is a source of perpetual confusion.
look with strenuous gaze into the whole problem as far as my
 This
and it has an equal right to satisfaction.
abandoning your illegitimate claim to knowledge, you place, with Job,
universe to be past finding out--if, having made this confession, and
the satisfaction of feelings which I admit to be, in great part, those
things--it is not by me that you will find objections raised to this
out.


of _contagium animatum_, is not altogether that of true philosophy.
points to the antiquity of the doctrine.
the darkness of the middle ages.
forefathers, and it already appears distinctly in the sixteenth
  We possess several works of that time which put forward
with the same sort of proof, with which the "Plastidulic soul" is now
'
These speculations of our 'forefathers' will appeal differently to
  By some they will be dismissed with a sneer; to
enunciated them.
however wealthy in regard to facts, can never rise into the region of
  They
unpossessed of the pinions necessary to reach the heights.
realise the mental act--the act of inspiration it might well be
reaches a theoretic conception which unravels and illuminates the
  There are minds,
relation to Mr.
  For my part, I should be inclined to ascribe
animatum_.
esteem; for he had before him the quantity of fact, and the measure of

a long time to discover these living germs of disease.
century did not find them, nor did the seventeenth, nor the
' But it may be urged, in reply to this, that the theoretic
 It is the forecast of
discovery.
men content with imperfect knowledge, it would be a thing to be
  But in modern investigation this is distinctly not the
been a motive power and not an anodyne.
Professor Virchow, 'in the nineteenth century we have begun little by
' So much the more honour, I
together the facts and analogies of contagious disease as to divine
  Professor Virchow seems to deprecate the
 Here
does he tell me, how much the discovery of facts in the nineteenth
discussions of preceding centuries.
is a subject of profound interest and importance.
poor philosopher who would sever modern chemistry from the efforts of
speculations of Lucretius and his predecessors, or who would claim for
the efforts of our 'forefathers' to penetrate this enigma.


to what a theory is or ought to be.
conception of the mind which accounts for observed facts, and which
  Every new
  The theory is not
asymptotically, towards certainty.
nine and ten years ago by Helmholtz and Hooker, was then exactly in
they would be able to announce an enormous strengthening of the
  Fissures in continuity which then existed, and which
that the further the theory is tested the more fully does it harmonise
  We shall probably never
truth of the theory from taking root in the general mind.
will it justify a total denial of the theory.
assumes in such a case the position of a denier is sure to be stranded
  The proper attitude, in my opinion, is to give to the
proportionate assent; and, if it be a theory which influences
than probability is for the moment unattainable.
the theory of _contagium vivum_, more especially in my mind, and must
that theory.
notwithstanding the late advances made by the doctrine of infectious
fungus which is really proved while I deny all other fungi so long as
' Professor Virchow, that is
probabilities on its side, however numerous be the cases of which it
has become a congeries of sensible facts.
single fungus of disease remains to be discovered, it is your bounden
  But by his
guide the practice of the medical man.
the theory of evolution excess upon one side has begotten excess upon

====================
NOTE.
in practice far too sound a philosopher to be restricted by the canon
 Haeckel.
upon the plague, he asks and answers the question, 'What is the
mon avis, l'analogie de la peste aver le charbon contagieux me paraît
microscopique qui contient le germe de l'affection.
présent on a peu cherché à trouver cet organisme.
Scientifique, March, 1879.



********************
XVI.

[Footnote: A discourse delivered at the Royal Institution of Great
Fragment.

honorary secretary.
 William Spottiswoode, now President
connotations.
by whose side I have worked for thirteen years.
regret is not without its opposite in the feeling with which I have
highest official position which it is in the power of English science
  Well, he, whose constant desire and practice were to
thought that at a time when the electric light occupied so much of
scientific side, might, to use his own pithy expression, be 'planted'
  I am here to-night with the view of trying, to

In the year 1800, Volta announced his immortal discovery of the pile.
Whetted to eagerness by the previous conflict between him and Galvani,
new discovery, repeating Volta's experiments, and extending them in
  The light and heat of the voltaic circuit attracted marked
question was subjected, the utility of platinum and charcoal as means
  Mr.
a battery surpassing in strength all its predecessors, fused platinum
so vivid that the sunshine, compared with it, appeared feeble.
[Footnote: Davy, 'Chemical Philosophy,' p.
]  Such effects
few members of the Royal Institution, Davy was enabled to construct a
obtained calorific and luminous effects far transcending anything
  The arc of flame between the carbon terminals
lime, were melted like wax in a candle flame; while fragments of

1810, Davy showed the action of this battery.
the alloy of iridium and osmium, and other refractory substances.
'Philosophical Magazine,' vol.
 p.
  Quetelet assigns the

150 pairs of plates in the theatre of the Royal Institution ('Jour.
Roy.
' vol.
 p.
]
The first condition to be fulfilled in the development of heat and
resistance.
strength of the current might be, neither heat nor light could be
  A rod of unresisting copper carries away uninjured and
resisting oak.
of alternate lengths of silver and platinum.
resistance, the platinum offers much.
platinum is raised to a white heat, while the silver is not visibly
  The same holds good with regard to the carbon terminals
  The interval
current, and it is by the gathering up of the force necessary to burst
carbon into that state of violent intestine commotion which we call
  The smallest interval of
  But when the carbon points
them a discharge of incandescent matter which carries, or may carry,
  The light comes almost wholly
  The space between them is filled with
receives the name of the Voltaic Arc.
resistance is strikingly illustrated by the deportment of silver and
  The current
case is thallium.
current is so free--the resistance to it is so small--that the heat
  As the thallium
the silver into its service, and finally fills the space between the
absent, it is incompetent to produce.
drawn attention to a danger which besets the spectroscopist when
degrees.
had I not known that silver was present, I should have inferred its
]
For seventy years, then, we have been in possession of this
streets and houses.
outset, but there were grave difficulties in their way.
difficulty arose from the waste of the carbons, which are dissipated
of matter from the one carbon to the other.
the proper distance asunder regulators were devised, the earliest, I
Serrin, who have been succeeded by Holmes, Siemens, Browning, Carré,
  By such arrangements the first difficulty
inseparable from the construction of the voltaic battery.
from the operation of that inexorable law which throughout the
refusing to yield the faintest glow of heat or glimmer of light
power.
must depend upon the value of the product in relation to that of the
  The metal zinc can be burnt like paper; it might be
all foreign heat and to burn the zinc in air of the temperature of
  This is done by placing zinc foil at the focus of a
beam, but which does not warm the air.
with a violet flame, and we could readily determine the amount of heat
  But zinc can be burnt not only in air
  It is thus burnt when acidulated water is poured over
  Here, however, to
dislodge the hydrogen with which the oxygen is combined.
consequence is that the heat due to the combustion of the metal in the
exact quantity necessary to separate the oxygen from the hydrogen.
Fully four-fifths of the total heat are used up in this molecular
  It is upon this
that we manufacture our electric light.

  The two
circuit of the other a thin platinum wire is introduced.
glows with a white heat, while the copper wire is not sensibly warmed.
Now an ounce of zinc, like an ounce of coal, produces by its complete
  The total heat
battery is also absolutely invariable.
continue in action until an ounce of zinc in each of them is consumed.
In the one case the heat generated is purely domestic, being liberated
the battery itself.
and in part foreign--in part within the battery and in part outside.
One of the fundamental truths to be borne in mind is that the sum of
and invariable.
heat within.
  By the
battery is not only carried away, but concentrated, so as to produce,
sun.
heat.
transmutation which outstrips the dreams of the alchemist, it can
the opposite side of the world.

the metallic fuel burnt within the battery; and, as zinc happens to be
more than seventy years, it has been too costly to come into general
  But within these walls, in the autumn of 1831, Faraday
investigate.
wire, with its ends disunited.
table, and in doing so exert the muscular effort necessary to overcome
  I unite its two ends and repeat the
  The effort now required, if accurately measured, would be
  In lifting the coil I cut the lines of the
always accompanied, in a closed conductor, by the production of an
remained separate, had no circuit through which it could pass.
current here evoked subsides immediately as heat; this heat being the
above that necessary to overcome the simple weight of the coil.
the coil is liberated it falls back to the table, and when its ends

and reaches the table with a diminished shock.
diminution is accurately represented by the warmth which the momentary
  Various devices were employed to exalt
and Saxton were long conspicuous.
attempts were sure to be made; but he chose to leave them in the hands
and principles.
of discovering new facts and new relations dependent on
already obtained; being assured that the latter would find their full
'
For more than twenty years magneto-electricity had subserved its first
nature.
application to practical ends being still unrealised.
light had raised thoughts and hopes of vast improvements in public
  Many inventors tried to obtain it cheaply; and in 1853
procuring, through the decomposition of water by a powerful
 Nollet, the oxygen and
  The experiment failed, but the
 Holmes other and
  Abandoning the attempt to produce the lime
apparatus and to augment its power, until it was finally able to yield

cumbrous and defective in the extreme; but judged by the light of

Faraday was profoundly interested in the growth of his own discovery.
The Elder Brethren of the Trinity House had had the wisdom to make him
reports regarding the light, the mixture of enthusiasm and caution
  Enthusiasm was with him a motive power,
  He rode it as a
  While dealing with Holmes,
  He checks the ardour of
insists over and over again on the necessity of continued experiment
  His matured opinion was,
  With reference to an
thus expresses himself: 'The beauty of the light was wonderful.
a mile off, the Apparent streams of light issuing from the lantern
three or four times as bright.
chiefly took their way made all above or below it black.
the bills, the churches, and the houses illuminated by it were
' Further on in his report he
to state that, in my opinion, Professor Holmes has practically
for lighthouse purposes, so far as its nature and management are
  The light produced is powerful beyond any other that I
degree; its regularity in the lantern is great; its management easy,
ordinary degree of intellect and knowledge.
conduct of Professor Holmes during these memorable experiments, it is
report submitted to the Elder Brethren of the Trinity House on the
perfect openness, candour, and honour of Professor Holmes.
answered every question, concealed no weak point, explained every
that direction, during several periods of close questioning, in a
real faults or possible objections, in respect both of the present
' [Footnote: Holmes's first offer of his machine
]
Soon afterwards the Elder Brethren of the Trinity House had the
Dungeness, where the magneto-electric light continued to shine for

The magneto-electric machine of the Alliance Company soon succeeded to
latter.
those of its predecessor.
flashing and destruction of which were sources of irregularity and

current being employed.
August, 1878, p.
]  M.
the express view of enabling it to cope with alternating currents.
During the International Exhibition of 1862, where the machine was
 Berlioz offered to dispose of the invention to the Elder
  They referred the matter to Faraday,
authorities have advanced so far as to be able to decide whether they
should require them, they see reason to suppose the means of their
not be sufficient.
to purchase a machine.
protect the interests of Holmes, who had borne the burden and heat
  The Alliance machines were introduced
the Trinity House, determined to have the best available apparatus,
principle into the lighthouses at Souter Point and the South Foreland.
These, machines were constructed by Professor Holmes, and they still
  With regard, then, to the application of
Dungeness light was introduced on January 31, 1862; the light at La
  But Faraday's
Dungeness by more than two years.
established at Cape Grisnez.
January 11, 1871; and at the South Foreland on January 1, 1872.

of the electric light, it began to shine on January 1, 1878.


really constitutes an important step in the development of this
  I refer to the form given in 1857 to the rotating armature
 Werner Siemens, of Berlin.
transversely round cores of iron, as in the machine of Saxton,
longitudinally round it, and obtained thereby greatly augmented
  Such an armature is
to your notice, and for which the institution is indebted to Mr.
Wilde, of Manchester.
magnets placed parallel to each other, and between their poles a
  The two ends of the wire which surrounds the
  In turning the handle and causing the

when this is done I immediately experience a greatly increased
  Something over and above the ordinary
of an additional amount of muscular force I am able to overcome it.
The excess of labour thus thrown upon my arm has its exact equivalent
subsidence in the coil of the armature.
rendered visible by connecting the two ends of the coil with a thin
  When the handle of the machine is rapidly turned the
with the heat of fusion.
the armature is broken, an instant relief from the labour thrown upon
  Clearly realise the equivalent of the
  During the period of turning the machine a
muscles of my arm.
would have produced a definite amount of heat.
actually developed during the rotation of the machine fell short of
fraction in the glowing platinum wire and the other parts of the
  Here, then, the electric current intervenes between my
the voltaic battery and its generated heat.
to all intents and purposes a vehicle which transports the heat both
is consumed.
intensifier of magical power.
numbers, 100° Fahr, and it is by the intensification of this heat that
Fahr.

Zinc, as I have said, is a fuel far too expensive to permit of the
purposes of life, and you will readily perceive that the human
still.
our machine, and it is this employment of our cheapest fuel, rendered
being able to apply the electric light to public use.

the consequent augmentation of the magneto-electric light, was taken
 Henry Wilde.
Royal Society, but before doing so I took the trouble of going to
 Wilde's experiments.
way: starting from a small machine like that worked in your presence a
peculiar shape, between whose poles rotated a Siemens armature;
magneto-electric current could produce powerful electro-magnets.
this armature currents were obtained vastly stronger than those
  These currents might
instead of this they were conducted round a second electro-magnet of
corresponding dimensions.
this series of operations: first, the armature of the small
electro-magnet, which was of considerable size; and, thirdly, the

 Wilde obtained
previously known.
 Wilde's paper is published in the
 89.
Wilde's machine was briefly expressed in a report to the Elder
to state that the machine is exceedingly effective, and that it far
']
But the discovery which, above all others, brought the practical
  On the 4th of

Electrical Force without the use of Permanent Magnetism.
paper on the same subject, by Dr.
17, 1867, before the Academy of Sciences in Berlin.
'Engineering,' No.
 45, Mr.
Professor Wheatstone's machines were constructed by Mr.
months of July and August, 1866.
 Sabine's
from the canon, in asserting which Faraday was specially strenuous,
  Towards
 Alfred Varley' also lodged a
embodying the principles of the dynamo-electric machine, but some
  His brother, Mr.
Cromwell varlet', when writing on this subject in 1867, does not
  Roy.
  It probably marks a
have never been recognised by the scientific societies of England.
the 14th of February a paper from Sir Charles Wheatstone was received,
the reaction thereon of Currents induced by the Magnet itself.
papers, which dealt with the same discovery, and which were
 the
  It would be difficult to find in the whole field of
than that set forth in these two papers.
iron--you can hardly pick up an old horse-shoe, for example--that does
beginning Siemens and Wheatstone have taught us to rise by a series of
previously unapproached.
the poles of a suitable electro-magnet.
at starting the faintest, trace of magnetism; when the armature

electro-magnet.
will then circulate round the magnet, augmenting its intensity by an
 The strengthened magnet instantly reacts upon

its enhanced power to bear upon the coil.
and take between magnet and armature, the strength of the former is
magnetic saturation.
currents of extraordinary power, and if an electric lamp be introduced
a most powerful light.
 Ladd introduced the
which fed the electro-magnets, while the other yielded the induced
]  By this discovery, then, we are enabled to avoid the
we are also enabled to drop the exciting magneto-electric machine, and
  By it, in short, the electric
electricity to enter the lists as the rival of our present means of

Soon after the announcement of their discovery by Siemens and
 Holmes, at the instance of the Elder Brethren of the
lighthouse purposes.
constructed a machine which, though hampered with defects, exhibited
  The light was developed in the focus of a
witnessed by the Elder Brethren, Mr.
observatory at Charlton, on the opposite side of the Thames.
upon the suspended haze, the light illuminated the atmosphere for
  Anything so sunlike in splendour had not, I imagine,
  The apparatus of Holmes, however, was
and Gramme.

the Elder Brethren of the Trinity House in 1876-77.
decided on the establishment of the electric light at the Lizard in
series of comparative experiments wherein the machines of Holmes, of
each other.
currents, while those of Holmes and the Alliance Company delivered
  The light of the latter was of the same
different azimuths, the discharge being so regulated as to yield a
  The following
machines:
Name of Machines.
    Minimum.



 1).

 2).


 1)        5,539       3,339
Siemens (Small, No.


 1 and 2)  11,396       6,869
Two Siemens' (Nos.

1876, made the Gramme and small Siemens practically equal to the
  But the photometric observations, in which the external
become more skilled in the management of the direct current, showed
  A close inspection of these
had been irritated by an Alpine sun.


 Ayres, the assistant engineer
  It is practically impossible to compare
sun-like lights.
six-wick Trinity oil lamp--was therefore in the first instance
  The candle power of the oil lamp
became known.
the Alliance machine over that of Holmes.
superiority both of the Gramme machine and of the small Siemens
  The large Siemens machine is shown to
Grammes, or of two Siemens together, here effected for the first time,
one case from 6663 candles to 11,396, and in the other case from 6864
  Where the arc is single and the external
  After
manner, Siemens machines of type No.

 Schwendler, they
]
*****
We have machines capable of sustaining a single light, and also
  The Gramme machine,
Embankment and at the Holborn Viaduct, delivers four currents, each
  In each circuit are five lamps
succession.
which, as already explained, the current has to leap; the force which
  Whether
succession, or to sustain only a single lamp, depends entirely upon
  He has, to guide him,
abide.

as to augment indefinitely its electromotive force--that force,
external obstacles.
the current generated by each cell shall pass through all the others,
  We
diminishing thereby the quantity of the current from each cell, but we
hindrances.
rendered so great, that the external resistance shall vanish in
  What is here said regarding the voltaic battery is
  If we wish our current to
must invoke a sufficient electromotive force.
multiplying, by the use of thin wires, the convolutions of the
voltaic battery.
cell, adds its electro-motive force to that of all the others; and
of current contributed by each convolution, the integrated current
necessary for the production of a series of lights in its course.
current is, as it were, rendered at once thinner and more piercing by
power.
light have a small internal resistance associated with a small
  In such machines the wire of the rotating
wire being commonly employed.
of electricity of low tension--in other words, of low leaping power.
Hence, though competent when their power is converged upon a single
force a passage when the number of intervals is increased.
augmenting the convolutions of our machines we sacrifice quantity and
convolutions, we sacrifice electro-motive force and gain quantity.
Whether we ought to choose the one form of machine or the other
 If
low resistance and large quantity must be employed.
obtain in the same circuit several lights of moderate intensity,
electro-motive power must be invoked.

the coil being connected together, every alteration of the magnetism
the coil.
change.
be, as long as its condition remains permanent no current is
  Conceive, then, the pole of a magnet placed near one end
  During the
magnetism of the bar, and accompanying this change we shall have an
  If, instead of moving the
pole, a similar alteration of the magnetism of the bar will occur, and
  You have here the
 Gramme to the construction of his
 [Footnote: 'Comptes Rendus,' 1871, p.
  See
 de Chem.
vol.
 p.
a bar as we have here described; and for this purpose he bent it into
rapidly close to the poles of a horse-shoe magnet.
the current varied with the motion and with the character of the
  The result was that the currents in the two
directions.
commutator, to gather up the currents and cause them to flow in the
  The first machines of Gramme, therefore, furnished
  M.
Gramme subsequently so modified his machine as to produce alternating
  Such alternating machines are employed to produce the

Another machine of great alleged merit is that of M.
  It
cores, round which are wound coils of copper wire.
caused to rotate between the opposite poles of powerful
  On passing each pole the core or tooth is strongly
current of corresponding strength.
approaching to and retreating from a pole, and in passing different
conflicting electric streams are gathered up and caused to flow in a
  The bobbins, in which the currents are induced, can be so
machine.
 Lontin applies the
 Wilde.
which is carried round the electro-magnets of a second and larger
  Wilde's principle, it may be added, is also applied on the
being used in each case to excite the electro-magnets of the large

The Farmer-Wallace machine is also an apparatus of great power.
consists of a combination of bobbins for induced currents, and of
discovered by Siemens and Wheatstone.
the production of the electric light, the electromotive force is so
circuit.
the shape of the carbons.
carbons with bevelled edges are employed, one above the other.
electric discharge passes from edge to edge, and shifts its position
  The duration of the light in
  I have myself seen
 Ladd's workshop in the
Station of the Metropolitan Railway.
machine' pours forth a flood of electricity of low tension.
unable to cross the interval necessary for the production of the
  When sent through
extraordinary splendour.

  It brilliantly illuminated the theatre of the Royal
]
The machine of M.
from Paris for our instruction, is the newest of all.
construction he falls back upon the principle of the magneto-electric
currents.
disposition of his bobbins, M.
a light equal to that produced by forty magnets in the Alliance
  While the space occupied is only one-fifth, the cost is
  In the de Méritens machine
  The internal heat is hardly sensible,
small.
 de Méritens maintains a
 [Footnote: The
light, yielding about 1,900 candles; the large machine transforms
]
*****
In relation to this subject, inventors fall into two classes, the
  M.
has hitherto belonged to inventors of the first class, but I have
will place him in the other class also.
rods, M.
 The
  The
  At the
electro-magnets.
carbons together, and in so doing throws itself out of circuit,
  The carbons are caused
conjunction with the electro-magnet.
proprietors of the Times, every facility has been given to M.
to develope and simplify his invention at Printing House Square.
illumination of the press-room, which I had the pleasure of
 Rapieff himself, is extremely
  There are, I believe, five lamps
extinction of any lamp does not compromise the action of the others.
M.

Many other inventors might here be named, and fresh ones are daily
  Mr.
this subject.
carbon a rod, he has, I am assured, obtained very satisfactory
  The small resistances brought into play by his minute arcs
 Werdermann to introduce a number of lamps into a circuit
  M.
Reynier is also the inventor of a very beautiful little lamp, in which
the circumference of a carbon wheel which rotates underneath the
  The light is developed at the place of contact of rod and
  One of the last steps, though I am informed not quite the
wastes more profusely than the negative, and this is alleged to be due
  It occurred to Mr.
to chill the negative artificially, with the view of diminishing or
  This he accomplishes by making the
a small jet of cold water against the interior of the cone.
negative copper is thus caused to remain fixed in space, for it is not
  I have seen

I might go on to other inventions, achieved or projected.
there is something bewildering in the recent rush of constructive
  The question and its
towards the improvement both of machines and regulators.
to our public lighting, I strongly lean to the opinion that the
  I am not so
  As, however, I am
market in the slightest degree, I limit myself to this general

To one inventor in particular belongs the honour of the idea, and the
a candle.
Russian officer, M.
  He sets two carbon rods upright at a
insulating substance like plaster of Paris.
in metallic holders.
two carbons by a little cross-piece of the same substance placed
  This cross-piece is immediately
established is afterwards maintained.
while the substance between them melts like the wax of a candle.
comparison, however, only holds good for the act of melting; for, as

 Rapieff and Mr.
dispensed with altogether, the current passing from point to point
  M.
new candle, in which the plaster is abandoned, while between the two
material.
be lighted before you; they produce a very brilliant light.
The machine of M.
worked by an excellent gas-engine, lent for the occasion by the
  Crossley, of Manchester.
steam.
should be consumed at the same rate.
alternating currents by which this equal consumption is secured.
will be seen that M.
introducing the candle principle in their stead.
performance of the Jablochkoff candle on the Thames Embankment and the
waste of light towards the sky.
added, would be more effective in a street, where their light would be
they now occupy in London.


complicated instrument, to sit down beside its proposed constructor,
  The study of the inventor's
me.
occasions by the late Mr.
Lambeth.
far to seek.
he was engaged might be, he would instantly turn aside from it to
  He had an inventor's
 The late Mr.
possessed the same power in a very considerable degree.
Continent, Froment, Breguet, Sauerwald, and others might be mentioned
  Such minds resemble a
  Stirred by a hint, crystals
 That Mr.
Edison possesses this intuitive power in no common measure, is proved
  He has the penetration to seize
to novel and concrete combinations.
accomplished nothing that we can recognise as new in relation to the
complicated problem on which he is engaged would be unwarranted.

 Edison's alleged
us regarding the laws of the current, and what Joule has taught us
heat.
certain point into two branches, which reunite in a single wire
  From the positive end of
point of junction, where it divides itself between the branches
  If the branches be equally resistant,
  If one branch be
the freer path.
inversely proportional to the resistance.
process is derived from the deportment of water.
an island it divides, passing right and left of the obstacle, and
  If the two branch beds be equal in depth,
them.
through the more open course.
have an indefinite number of islands, producing an indefinite
have, instead of two branches, any number of branches, the current
relation of flow to resistance.

  Suppose an insulated copper rod, which
streets, say along the Strand.
of a powerful voltaic battery, a good metallic connection being
under the street.
with the water-pipes, the circuit is incomplete and no current will
be connected with the adjacent water-pipes, the circuit will be
  Supposing our battery to be at
House, a wire can be carried from the rod into the building, and the
subordinate branches, which reunite afterwards and return through the
  The branch currents may be employed to
its alloys.
tapped at one hundred points.
accordance with law, its power to produce light being solely limited
  The process of division closely resembles the
current representing a great artery, the water-pipes carrying the
branches represent the various vessels by which the blood is
  This, if I understand aright, is Mr.
Edison's proposed mode of illumination.
hand.
incandescence are also at hand.
division of the current and the development of its light and heat are
  There is no room for a 'discovery,' in the
of that mechanical ingenuity which has given us the sewing machine and
  Knowing something of the intricacy

 [Footnote: More than thirty years
investigated by Dr.
]
*****
It is sometimes stated as a recommendation to the electric light, that
to point to the experiments of Davy, which show that the heat of the
  The
  To
first slightly warmed by the current, and then gradually raised to a
  When first warmed, the wire sends forth rays which have
  They are what we call invisible rays;
Fahr, does it begin to glow with a faint, red light.
it emits prior to redness are all invisible rays, which can warm the
  When the temperature of the wire is
enormously augmented in intensity.

  They make up
  of the emission from a brilliant electric light.
You can by no means have the light of the carbons without this
  The visible radiation is, as

It is easy to illustrate the growth in intensity of these invisible
 The
hydrogen, nitrogen, chlorine, iodine, bromine, sulphur, phosphorus,

sharply off, but allows the invisible free transmission.
dissolving iodine in sulphur, Professor Dewar has recently added to
  The mixture may be made as
invisible rays.
invisible rays from the total radiation, and to watch their
  Expressing the radiation from a
all its rays are invisible--by the number 1, the invisible radiation

 i.

non-luminous emission that we obtain the luminous; the heat rays
the light rays.
rays can produce all the effects ascribed to the mirrors of Archimedes
  While incompetent to produce the faintest
will inflame paper, burn up wood, and even ignite combustible metals.
When they impinge upon a metal refractory enough to bear their shock
to yield, when analysed, all the colours of the spectrum.
the dark rays emitted by the incandescent carbons are converted into
 Still, so powerless are these invisible
competent to raise platinum foil to bright redness, without
  Light for light, no doubt, the
less than that imparted by gas flames.
smaller size of the carbons, and of the comparative smallness of the
  It is also less because
  The
constitutes four-fifths of our atmosphere, and which, while it
and this lowering of the temperature by the inert atmospheric
to produce the necessary light.
appear paradoxical, it is entirely because of its enormous actual
 It is this
heat greater in the electric light than in our brightest flames.
electric light, moreover, requires no air to sustain it.
the most perfect air vacuum.
purchased at the expense of the vitalising constituent of the

Two orders of minds have been implicated in the development of this
purely scientific, and who cares little for practical ends; secondly,
  It
wants to gain knowledge, while the other wishes to make money; but I
profit in the love of his work.
sometimes scornful towards those of the other.
something superb in the disdain with which Cuvier hands over the
practical achievements are only the easy application of truths not
for their own sake, impelled solely by an ardour for knowledge.
who turned them into practice could not have discovered them, while
pursue them to a practical result.
peopled colonies, your vessels which furrow the seas; this abundance,
he now alive, 'regarding the electric light'--'all come from
 The day
no more.

account the reaction of the applications of science upon science
  The improvement of an old instrument or the invention of a
senses of the scientific investigator.
of the community is also an object worthy of the best efforts of the
  Still, assuredly it is well and wise for a nation to
eye, and excite public admiration, are the outgrowth of long
a purely intellectual stimulus.
comprehend the real origin of the marvels of industry and the wealth
  I need no other proof of this than the frequent
erroneous expression, "applied science.
talent stated some time ago that in our day the reign of theoretic
 Nothing,
than the consequences which might flow from these words.
the imperious necessity of a reform in our higher education.
exists no category of sciences to which the name of "applied science"
  We have science and the applications of science which
'
*****
A final reflection is here suggested.
cohort of social regenerators--men of high thoughts and
under the control of a hierarchy which should dictate to the man of
  How this hierarchy is to
  They decry and denounce
and molecules, as subjects lying far apart from the world's needs; and
discoveries.
philosopher derives inspiration and unifying power is essentially
  Faraday lived in this ideal world.
when he first obtained a spark from the magnet, an Oxford don
placed a new and facile implement in the hands of the incendiary.
regret, a Comtist hierarchy would have probably added repression,
practical sphere of action than peddling with a magnet.
Faraday's spark which now shines upon our coasts, and promises to
perhaps at no distant day, our homes.
